A 75-year-old man is brought to hospital with an episode of dizziness. He still feels unwellwhen he is seen 30 min after the onset. He was well until the last 6 months, since whenhe has had some falls, irregularly. On some occasions he lost consciousness and is unsurehow long he has been unconscious. On a few occasions he has fallen, grazing his knees,and on others he has felt dizzy and has had to sit down but has not lost consciousness.These episodes usually happened on exertion, but once or twice they have occurred whilesitting down. He recovers over 10–15 min after each episode.He lives alone and most of the episodes have not been witnessed. Once his granddaughterwas with him when he blacked out. Worried, she called an ambulance. He looked so paleand still that she thought that he had died. He was taken to hospital, by which time he hadrecovered completely and was discharged and told that he had a normal electrocardiogram(ECG) and chest X-ray.There is no history of chest pain or palpitations. He has had gout and some urinary fre-quency. A diagnosis of benign prostatic hypertrophy has been made for which he is on notreatment. He takes ibuprofen occasionally for the gout. He stopped smoking 5 years ago.He drinks 5–10 units of alcohol weekly. The dizziness and blackouts have not been asso-ciated with alcohol. There is no relevant family history. He used to work as an electrician.

He is pale with a blood pressure of 96/64 mmHg. The pulse rate is 33/min, regular. Thereare no heart murmurs. The jugular venous pressure is raised 3 cm with occasional rises.There is no leg oedema; the peripheral pulses are palpable except for the left dorsalis pedis.The respiratory system is normal 

 1The blackouts do not seem to have had any relationship to posture. They have been a mix-ture of dizziness and loss of consciousness. The one witnessed episode seems to have beenassociated with loss of colour. This suggests a loss of cardiac output usually associated withan arrhythmia. This may be the case despite the absence of any other cardiac symptoms.There may be an obvious flushing of the skin as cardiac output and blood flow return.The normal ECG and chest X-ray when he attended hospital after an episode do not rule outan intermittent conduction problem. On this occasion the symptoms have remained in amore minor form. The ECG shows third-degree or complete heart block. There is completedissociation of the atrial rate and the ventricular rate which is 33/min. The episodes of lossof consciousness are called Stokes–Adams attacks and are caused by self-limited rapid tachy-arrhythmias at the onset of heart block or transient asystole. Although these have beenintermittent in the past he is now in stable complete heart block and, if this continues, theslow ventricular rate will be associated with reduced cardiac output which may causefatigue, dizziness on exertion or heart failure. Intermittent failure of the escape rhythm maycause syncope.1Electrocardiogram showing complete heart block, p-waves arrowed.!The differential diagnosis of transient loss of consciousness splits into neurologicaland vascular causes. A witness is very helpful in differentiation. Neurological causesare various forms of epilepsy, often with associated features. Vascular causes arerelated to local or general reduction in cerebral blood flow. Local reduction mayoccur in transient ischaemic attacks or vertebrobasilar insufficiency. A more globalreduction, often with pallor, occurs with arrhythmias, postural hypotension andvasovagal faints.Differential diagnosisOn examination, the occasional rises in the jugular venous pressure are intermittent ‘can-non’ a-waves as the right atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve. In addition,the intensity of the first heart sound will vary The treatment should be insertion of a pacemaker. If the rhythm in complete heart blockis stable then a permanent pacemaker should be inserted as soon as this can be arranged.This should be a dual-chamber system pacing the atria then the ventricles (DDD, dualsensing and pacing, triggered by atrial sensing, inhibited by ventricular sensing) or pos-sibly a ventricular pacing system (VVI, pacing the ventricle, inhibited by ventricular sens-ing). If there is doubt about the ventricular escape rhythm then a temporary pacemakershould be inserted immediately.
5When a patient suffers transient loss of consciousness, a careful history from a witnessmay help with the diagnosis.Normal examination and ECG do not rule out intermittent serious arrhythmias.Large waves in the jugular venous pressure are usually regular giant v-waves in tricuspidregurgitation or intermittent cannon a-waves in complete heart block
-----
A 34-year-old male accountant comes to the emergency department with acute chestpain. There is a previous history of occasional stabbing chest pain for 2 years. The currentpain had come on 4 h earlier at 8 pm and has been persistent since then. It is central inposition, with some radiation to both sides of the chest. It is not associated with shortnessof breath or palpitations. The pain is relieved by sitting up and leaning forward. Twoparacetamol tablets taken earlier at 9 pm did not make any difference to the pain.The previous chest pain had been occasional, lasting a second or two at a time and withno particular precipitating factors. It has usually been on the left side of the chestalthough the position had varied.Two weeks previously he had an upper respiratory tract infection which lasted 4 days. Thisconsisted of a sore throat, blocked nose, sneezing and a cough. His wife and two childrenwere ill at the same time with similar symptoms but have been well since then. He has a his-tory of migraine. In the family history his father had a myocardial infarction at the age of51 years and was found to have a marginally high cholesterol level. His mother and two sis-ters, aged 36 and 38 years, are well. After his father’s infarct he had his lipids measured; thecholesterol was 5.1 mmol/L (desirable range/H110215. He is a non-smoker who drinks15 units of alcohol per week.

His pulse rate is 75/min, blood pressure 124/78 mmHg. His temperature is 37. There isnothing abnormal to find in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
6
A chest X-ray is normal. The haemoglobin and white cell count are normal. The creatinekinase level is slightly raised. Other biochemical tests are normal Electrocardiogram 

 2The previous chest pains lasting a second or two are unlikely to be of any real signifi-cance. Cardiac pain, and virtually any other significant pain, lasts longer than this, andstabbing momentary left-sided chest pains are quite common. The positive family historyincreases the risk of ischaemic heart disease but there are no other risk factors evidentfrom the history and examination. The relief from sitting up and leaning forward is typicalof pain originating in the pericardium. The ECG shows elevation of the ST segment whichis concave upwards, typical of pericarditisand unlike the upward convexity found in theST elevation after myocardial infarction.The story of an upper respiratory tract infection shortly before suggests that this may wellhave a viral aetiology. The viruses commonly involved in pericarditis are Coxsackie Bviruses. The absence of a pericardial rub does not rule out pericarditis. Rubs often vary inintensity and may not always be audible. If this diagnosis was suspected, it is often worthlistening again on a number of occasions for the rub. Pericarditis often involves some adja-cent myocardial inflammation and this could explain the rise in creatine kinase.Pericarditis may occur as a complication of a myocardial infarction but this tends to occura day or more later – either inflammation as a direct result of death of the underlying heartmuscle, or as a later immunological effect (Dressler’s syndrome). Pericarditis also occursas part of various connective tissue disorders, arteritides, tuberculosis and involvementfrom other local infections or tumours. Myocardial infarction is not common at the age of34 years but it certainly occurs. Other causes of chest pain, such as oesophageal pain ormusculoskeletal pain, are not suggested by the history and investigations.Thrombolysis in the presence of pericarditis carries a slight risk of bleeding into the peri-cardial space, which could produce cardiac tamponade. This arises when a fluid (an effu-sion, blood or pus) in the pericardial space compresses the heart, producing a paradoxicalpulse with pressure dropping on inspiration, jugular venous pressure rising on inspirationand a falling blood pressure. In this case, the evidence suggests pericarditis and thrombol-ysis is not indicated. The ECG and enzymes should be followed, the patient re-examinedregularly for signs of tamponade, and analgesics given.A subsequent rise in antibody titres against Coxsackie virus suggested a viral pericarditis.Symptoms and ECG changes resolved in 4–5 days. An echocardiogram did not suggest anypericardial fluid and showed good left ventricular muscle function. The symptoms settledwith rest and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
8ST segment elevation which is concave upwards is characteristic of pericarditis.Viral pericarditis in young people is most often caused by Coxsackie viruses.Myocarditis may be associated with pericarditis, and muscle function should be assessedon echocardiogram, and damage from creatine kinase and troponin measurements
-----
A 19-year-old boy has a history of repeated chest infections. He had problems with a coughand sputum production in the first 2 years of life and was labelled as bronchitic. Over the next14 years he was often ‘chesty’ and had spent 4–5 weeks a year away from school. Over the past2 years he has developed more problems and was admitted to hospital on three occasions withcough and purulent sputum. On the first two occasions, Haemophilus influenzaewas grownon culture of the sputum, and on the last occasion 2 months previously Pseudomonas aerugi-nosawas isolated from the sputum at the time of admission to hospital. He is still coughing upsputum. Although he has largely recovered from the infection, his mother is worried and askedfor a further sputum to be sent off. The report has come back from the microbiology labora-tory showing that there is a scanty growth of Pseudomonason culture of the sputum.There is no family history of any chest disease. Routine questioning shows that his appetiteis reasonable, micturition is normal and his bowels tend to be irregular.

On examination he is thin, weighing 48 kg and 1.6 m (5 ft 6 in) tall.The only finding in the chest is of a few inspiratory crackles over the upper zones ofboth lungs. Cardiovascular and abdominal examination is normal 

 3The chest X-ray shows abnormal shadowing throughout both lungs, more marked in bothupper lobes with some ring shadows and tubular shadows representing thickened bronchialwalls. These findings would be compatible with a diagnosis of bronchiectasis. The pul-monary arteries are prominent, suggesting a degree of pulmonary hypertension. The distri-bution is typical of that found in cystic fibrosiswhere the changes are most evident in theupper lobes. Most other forms of bronchiectasis are more likely to occur in the lower lobeswhere drainage by gravity is less effective. High-resolution computed tomography (CT) ofthe lungs is the best way to diagnose bronchiectasis and to define its extent and distribu-tion. In younger and milder cases of cystic fibrosis, the predominant organisms in the spu-tum are Haemophilus influenzaeandStaphylococcus aureus. Later, as more lung damageoccurs,Pseudomonas aeruginosais a common pathogen. Once present in the lungs in cys-tic fibrosis, it is difficult or impossible to remove it completely.Cystic fibrosis should always be considered when there is a story of repeated chest infec-tions in a young person. Although it presents most often below the age of 20 years, diag-nosis may be delayed until the 20s, 30s or even 40s in milder cases. Associated problemsoccur in the pancreas (malabsorption, diabetes), sinuses and liver. It has become evidentthat some patients are affected more mildly, especially those with the less common geneticvariants. These milder cases may only be affected by the chest problems of cystic fibrosisand have little or no malabsorption from the pancreatic insufficiency.
10!The differential diagnosis in this young man would be other causes of diffusebronchiectasis such as agammaglobulinaemia or immotile cilia. Respiratory functionshould be measured to see the degree of functional impairment. Bronchiectasis in theupper lobes may occur in tuberculosis or in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosisassociated with asthma.Differential diagnosisThe common diagnostic test for cystic fibrosis is to measure the electrolytes in the sweat,where there is an abnormally high concentration of sodium and chloride. At the age of 19 years, the sweat test may be less reliable. It is more specific if repeated after the adminis-tration of fludrocortisone. An alternative would be to have the potential difference acrossthe nasal epithelium measured at a centre with a special interest in cystic fibrosis. Cysticfibrosis has an autosomal recessive inheritance with the commonest genetic abnormality/H9004F508 found in 85 per cent of cases. The gene is responsible for the protein controllingchloride transport across the cell membrane. The commoner genetic abnormalities can beidentified and the current battery of genetic tests identifies well over 95 per cent of cases.However, the absence of /H9004F508 and other common abnormalities would not rule out cys-tic fibrosis related to the less common genetic variants.In later stages, lung transplantation can be considered. Since the identification of thegenetic abnormality, trials of gene-replacement therapy have begun.Milder forms of cystic fibrosis may present in adolescence and adulthood.Milder forms are often related to less common genetic abnormalities.A high-resolution CT scan is the best way to detect bronchiectasis and to define its extent
-----
A 26-year-old teacher has consulted her general practitioner (GP) for her persistent cough.She wants to have a second course of antibiotics because an initial course of amoxicillinmade no difference. The cough has troubled her for 3 months since she moved to a newschool. The cough is now disturbing her sleep and making her tired during the day. Sheteaches games, and the cough is troublesome when going out to the playground and onjogging. In her medical history she had her appendix removed 3 years ago. She had hertonsils removed as a child and was said to have recurrent episodes of bronchitis betweenthe ages of 3 and 6 years. She has never smoked and takes no medication other than anoral contraceptive. Her parents are alive and well and she has two brothers, one of whomhas hayfever.

The respiratory rate is 18/min. Her chest is clear and there are no abnormalities in the nose,pharynx, cardiovascular, respiratory or nervous systems.
Chest X-ray is reported as normal.Spirometry is carried out at the surgery and she is asked to record her peak flow rate athome, the best of three readings every morning and every evening for 2 weeks.Spirometry results are as follows:Actual PredictedFEV1(L) 3.4FER (FEV1/FVC) (%) 78 75–80PEF (L/min) 470 440–540FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; FER, forced expira-tory ratio; PEF, peak expiratory flow.1Peak flowrecording at home over 11days 

 4The peak flow pattern shows a degree of diurnal variation. This does not reach the diag-nostic criteria for asthmabut it is suspicious. The mean daily variation in peak flow fromthe recordings is 36 L/min and the mean evening peak flow is 453 L/min, giving a meandiurnal variation of 8 per cent. There is a small diurnal variation in normals and a vari-ation of/H1102215 per cent is diagnostic of asthma. In this patient the label of ‘bronchitis’ as achild was probably asthma. The family history of an atopic condition (hayfever in abrother), and the triggering of the cough by exercise and going out in to the cold also sug-gest bronchial hyper-responsiveness typical of asthma.Patients with a chronic persistent cough of unexplained cause should have a chest X-ray.When the X-ray is clear the cough is likely to be produced by one of three main causes innon-smokers. Around half of such cases have asthma or will go on to develop asthma overthe next few years. Half of the rest have rhinitis or sinusitis with a post-nasal drip. In around20 per cent the cough is related to gastro-oesophageal reflux. A small number of cases willbe caused by otherwise unsuspected problems such as foreign bodies, bronchial ‘adenoma’,sarcoidosis or fibrosing alveolitis. Cough is a common side-effect in patients treated withangiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.In this patient the diagnosis of asthma was confirmed with an exercise test which wasassociated with a 25 per cent drop in peak flow after completion of 6 min vigorous exer-cise. Alternatives would have been another non-specific challenge such as methacholineor histamine, or a therapeutic trial of inhaled steroids.After the exercise test, an inhaled steroid was given and the cough settled after 1 week.The inhaled steroid was discontinued after 4 weeks and replaced by a /H92522-agonist to usebefore exercise. However, the cough recurred with more evident wheeze and shortness ofbreath, and treatment was changed back to an inhaled steroid with a /H92522-agonist asneeded. If control was not established, the next step would be to check inhaler techniqueand treatment adherence and to consider adding a long-acting /H92522-agonist. In some cases,the persistent dry cough associated with asthma may require more vigorous treatmentthan this. Inhaled steroids for a month or more, or even a 2-week course of oral steroidsmay be needed to relieve the cough. The successful management of dry cough relies onestablishing the correct diagnosis and treating it vigorously.
12The three commonest causes of persistent dry cough with a normal chest X-ray areasthma (50 per cent), sinusitis and postnasal drip (25 per cent) and reflux oesophagitis(20 per cent).Asthma may present as a cough (cough variant asthma) with little or no airflow obstruction initially, although this develops later.Persistent cough with normal chest examination is unlikely to have a bacterial cause orrespond to antibiotic treatment This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 56-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of abdominalpain. Twenty-four hours previously she developed a continuous pain in the upperabdomen which has become progressively more severe. The pain radiates into the back.She feels nauseated and alternately hot and cold. Her past medical history is notable for aduodenal ulcer which was successfully treated with Helicobactereradication therapy 5 years earlier. She smokes 15 cigarettes a day, and shares a bottle of wine each eveningwith her husband.

The patient looks unwell and dehydrated. She weighs 115 kg. She is febrile, 38.5°C, herpulse is 108/min and blood pressure 124/76 mmHg. Cardiovascular and respiratory systemexamination is normal. She is tender in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium, withguarding and rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds are sparse.
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLWhite cell count 19.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 239/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 116/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 19/H9262mol/L 3–17/H9262mol/LAlkaline phosphatase 58 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase (AAT) 67 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 72 IU/L 11–51 IU/LC-reactive protein (CRP) 256 mg/L/H110215 mg/L Plain abdominalX-ray 

 5This woman has acute cholecystitis. Cholecystitis is most common in obese, middle-agedwomen, and classically is triggered by eating a fatty meal. Cholecystitis is usually causedby a gallstone impacting in the cystic duct. Continued secretion by the gallbladder leadsto increased pressure and inflammation of the gallbladder wall. Bacterial infection is usu-ally by Gram-negative organisms and anaerobes. Ischaemia in the distended gallbladdercan lead to perforation causing either generalized peritonitis or formation of a localizedabscess. Alternatively the stone can spontaneously disimpact and the symptoms spontan-eously improve. Gallstones can get stuck in the common bile duct leading to cholangitisor pancreatitis. Rarely, gallstones can perforate through the inflamed gallbladder wall intothe small intestine and cause intestinal obstruction (gallstone ileus). The typical symptomis of sudden-onset right upper quadrant abdominal pain which radiates into the back. Inuncomplicated cases the pain improves within 24 h. Fever suggests a bacterial infection.Jaundice usually occurs if there is a stone in the common bile duct. There is usuallyguarding and rebound tenderness in the right upper quadrant (Murphy’s sign).In this patient the leucocytosis and raised CRP are consistent with acute cholecystitis. Ifthe serum bilirubin and liver enzymes are very deranged, acute cholangitis due to a stonein the common bile duct should be suspected. The abdominal X-ray is normal; the major-ity of gallstones are radiolucent and do not show on plain films.
16!The major differential diagnoses of acute cholecystitis include perforated pepticulcer, acute pancreatitis, acute hepatitis, subphrenic abscess, retrocaecal appendicitisand perforated carcinoma or diverticulum of the hepatic flexure of the colon.Myocardial infarction or right lower lobe pneumonia may also mimic cholecystitis.Differential diagnosisThis patient should be admitted under the surgical team. Serum amylase should be meas-ured to rule out pancreatitis. Blood cultures should be taken. Chest X-ray should be per-formed to exclude pneumonia, and erect abdominal X-ray to rule out air under thediaphragm which occurs with a perforated peptic ulcer. An abdominal ultrasound willshow inflammation of the gallbladder wall. The patient should be kept nil by mouth, givenintravenous fluids and commenced on intravenous cephalosporins and metronidazole.The patient should be examined regularly for signs of generalized peritonitis or cholangi-tis. If the symptoms settle down the patient is normally discharged to be readmitted in afew weeks once the inflammation has settled down to have a cholecystectomy.Acute cholecystitis typically causes right upper quadrant pain and a positive Murphy’s sign.Potential complications include septicaemia and peritonitis
-----
A 66-year-old woman, a retired nurse, consults her general practitioner (GP) with a 4-month history of tiredness, slight breathlessness on exertion and loss of weight from 71to 65 kg. Her appetite is unchanged and normal, she has no nausea or vomiting, but overthe last 2 months she has had an altered bowel habit with constipation alternating withher usual and normal pattern. She has not seen any blood in her faeces and has had noabdominal pain. There is no relevant past or family history, and she is on no medication.She has smoked 20 cigarettes daily for 48 years and drinks 20–28 units of alcohol a week.

She has slight pallor but otherwise looks well. No lymphadenopathy is detected, and herbreasts, thyroid, heart, chest and abdomen, including rectal examination, are all normal.The blood pressure is 148/90 mmHg.
17
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 76 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 277/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 142 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 106/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LUrinalysis: no protein, no bloodBlood film shows a microcytic hypochromic picture 

 6The microcytic, hypochromic anaemia and the altered bowel habit, the only symptomreferable to the gastrointestinal tract, point to a carcinoma of the colon, which would alsoexplain her weight loss. A barium enema revealed a neoplasm in the sigmoid colon, con-firmed by colonoscopy and biopsy. Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound showed no pul-monary metastases and no intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy or hepatic metastasesrespectively.She proceeded to a sigmoid colectomy and end-to-end anastamosis, and was regularlyfollowed-up for any evidence of recurrence. Histology showed a grade I tumour.Carcinoma of the colon is increasing in frequency. If it presents at an early stage then the prospect for cure is good. Rectal bleeding, alteration in bowel habit for longer than 1 month at any age, or iron-deficient anaemia in men or postmenopausal women are indi-cations for investigation of the gastrointestinal tract.Smoking is a risk factor for carcinoma of the colon.
18Carcinoma of the colon can present with few or no symptoms or signs in the gastro-intestinal tract.Carcinoma of the colon must be considered as a cause of iron-deficient anaemia
-----
A man of 45 consults his general practitioner (GP) with a 6-month history of reducedappetite and weight loss, from 78 to 71 kg. During the last 3 months he has had intermit-tent nausea, especially in the mornings, and in the last 3 months the morning nausea hasbeen accompanied by vomiting on several occasions. For 1 month he has noted swellingof his ankles. Despite his weight loss he has recently noticed his trousers getting tighter.He has had no abdominal pain. He has no relevant past history and knows no family history as he was adopted. He takes no medication. From the age of 18 he has smoked 5–6 cigarettes daily and drunk 15–20 units of alcohol per week. He has been a chef all hisworking life, without exception in fashionable restaurants. He now lives alone as his wifeleft him 1 year ago.

He has plethoric features. There is pitting oedema of his ankles. He appears to have lostweight from his limbs, but not his trunk. He has nine spider naevi on his upper trunk. Hispulse is normal and the rate is 92/min. His jugular venous pressure (JVP) is not raised andhis blood pressure is 146/84 mmHg. The cardiovascular and respiratory systems are nor-mal. The abdomen is distended. He has no palpable masses but there is shifting dullnessand a fluid thrill.
19
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 107 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 10.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 321/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 131 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 101/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 7This man has abnormal liver function tests which indicate hepatic failure; the hypopro-teinaemia has caused the ascites and ankle swelling. The number of spider naevi is morethan the accepted normal of three. The cause is likely to be alcohol as it is a commoncause of this problem, he is at increased risk through his work in the catering business. Hissymptoms of morning nausea and vomiting are typical, and this would account for hiscushingoid appearance (alcohol increases adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) secre-tion) and the macrocytsis on the blood film (due to dietary folate deficiency and a directtoxic action on the bone marrow by alcohol). However his alcohol intake is too low to beconsistent with the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease. When the provisional diagnosis isdiscussed with him though, he eventually admits that his alcohol intake has been at least40–50 units per week for the last 20 years and has increased further during the last yearafter his marriage had ended, the reason for this being his drinking.The slight reductions in the sodium and urea reflect a chronic reduced intake of salt andprotein; the rise in bilirubin is insufficient to cause jaundice.Further investigations are the measurement of hepatitis viral serology, which was nega-tive, and an ultrasound of the abdomen. This showed a slight reduction in liver size, andan increase in splenic length of 2–3 cm. There was no evidence of a hepatoma. These find-ings indicate that portal hypertension has developed. A liver biopsy, performed to confirmthe diagnosis, assess the degree of histological damage and exclude other pathology,showed changes of cirrhosis.The crucial aim in management is to impress upon the patient the necessity to stop drink-ing alcohol, in view of the degree of liver damage, the presumed portal hypertension andthe risk of oesophageal varices and bleeding, and to effect this by his attending an alco-hol addiction unit. In the short term he should also improve his diet to increase his pro-tein intake. Diuretics could be used to reduce his oedema, but it should be rememberedthat they could cause postural hypotension more easily against this background.His attendance at the addiction unit was fitful, he continued to drink heavily and he died3 years later as a result of a second bleed from oesophageal varices.
20Patients who drink excessive amounts of alcohol will often disguise this fact in their historyAlcoholic liver disease has a poor prognosis if the alcohol intake is not terminated
-----
A 22-year-old man presented with malaise and anorexia for 1 week. He vomited on oneoccasion, with no blood. He has felt feverish but has not taken his temperature. For 2 weeks he has had aching pains in the knees, elbows and wrists without any obviousswelling of the joints. He has not noticed any change in his urine or bowels.Five years ago he had glandular fever confirmed serologically. He smokes 25 cigarettes perday and drinks 20–40 units of alcohol per week. He has taken marijuana and ecstasy occa-sionally over the past 2 years and various tablets and mixtures at clubs without being sureof the constituents. He denies any intravenous drug use. He has had irregular homosexualcontacts but says that he has always used protection. He claims to have had an HIV testwhich was negative 6 months earlier. He has not travelled outside Western Europe in thelast 2 years.He is unemployed and lives in a flat with three other people. There is no relevant familyhistory.

He has a temperature of 38.6°C and looks unwell. He looks as if he may be a little jaun-diced. He is a little tender in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. There are no abnor-malities to find on examination of the joints or in any other system.
21
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 11.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 286/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LProthrombin time 17 s 10–14 sSodium 135 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 64/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 50 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 376 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 570 IU/L 5–35 IU/LFasting glucose 4 

 8The diagnosis is likely to be acute viral hepatitis. The biochemical results show abnormalliver function tests with a predominant change in the transaminases, indicating a hepato-cellular rather than an obstructive problem in the liver. This might be caused by hepatitis A,B or C. The raised white count is compatible with acute hepatitis. Homosexuality and intra-venous drug abuse are risk factors for hepatitis B and C. Other viral infections such ascytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus are possible.Since the drug ingestion history is unclear, there is a possibility of a drug-induced hepatitis.The prodromal joint symptoms suggest a viral infection as the cause, and this is more com-mon with hepatitis B. Serological tests can be used to see whether there are immunoglobu-lin M (IgM) antibodies indicating acute infection with one of these viruses, to confirm thediagnosis. The reported negative HIV test 6 months earlier makes an HIV-associated condi-tion unlikely although patients are not always reliable in their accounts of HIV tests, andHIV seroconversion should also be considered.Treatment is basically supportive in the acute phase. The prothrombin time in this patientis raised slightly but not enough to be an anxiety or an indicator of very severe disease.Liver function will need to be measured to monitor enzyme levels as a guide to progress.Alcohol and any other hepatotoxic drug intake should be avoided until liver function testsare back to normal. If hepatitis B or C is confirmed by serology then liver function testsand serological tests should be monitored for chronic disease, and antiviral therapy thenconsidered. Rare complications of the acute illness are fulminant hepatic failure, aplasticanaemia, myocarditis and vasculitis. The opportunity should be taken to advise him aboutthe potential dangers of his intake of cigarettes, drugs and alcohol, and to offer himappropriate support in these areas.
22Viral hepatitis is often associated with a prodrome of arthralgia and flu-like symptoms.Confirmatory evidence should be sought for patients’ reports of HIV test results
-----
An 85-year-old woman is investigated by her general practitioner (GP) for increasing tired-ness which has developed over the past 6 months. She has lost her appetite and feels con-stantly nauseated. She has lost about 8 kg in weight over the past 6 months. For the last4 weeks she has also complained of generalized itching and cramps. She has been hyper-tensive for 20 years and has been on antihypertensive medication for that time. She hashad two cerebrovascular accidents which have limited her mobility. She is an African-Caribbean, having emigrated to the UK in the 1960s. She lives alone but uses a ‘meals onwheels’ service and goes to a day hospital twice a week. She has two daughters.

Her conjunctivae are pale. Her pulse is 88/min regular, blood pressure 190/110 mmHg;mild pitting oedema of her ankles is present. Otherwise, examination of her cardiovascu-lar and respiratory systems is normal. Neurological examination shows a left upper motorneurone facial palsy with mild weakness and increased reflexes in the left arm and leg.She is able to walk with a stick. Funduscopy shows arteriovenous nipping and increasedtortuosity of the arteries.
23
NormalHaemoglobin 7.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 84 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 294/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 769/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LAlbumin 37 g/L 35–50 g/LCalcium 1.65 mmol/LPhosphate 3 

 9This patient presents with the typical symptoms of end-stage renal failure, namely anorexia,nausea, weight loss, fatigue, pruritus and cramps.The elevated urea and creatinine levels confirm renal failure but do not distinguish betweenacute and chronic renal failure. Usually, in the former, there is either evidence of a systemicillness or some other obvious precipitating cause, e. use of nephrotoxic drugs/prolongedepisode of hypotension, whereas in the latter there is a prolonged history of generalmalaise. If the patient has had previous blood tests measuring serum creatinine, these willbe informative about the progression of deterioration of renal function. In this patient, theanaemia and hyperparathyroidism (raised alkaline phosphatase) are features indicatingchronicity of the renal failure. The normochromic, normocytic anaemia is predominantlydue to erythropoietin deficiency (the kidney is the major source of erythropoietin produc-tion). Hyperparathyroidism is a result of elevated serum phosphate levels due to decreasedrenal clearance of phosphate and reduced vitamin D levels (the kidney is the site of hydrox-ylation of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to the active form 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol). A hand X-ray showing the typical appearances of hyperparathyroidism (erosion of the ter-minal phalanges and subperiosteal erosions of the radial aspects of the middle phalanges),implying long-standing renal failure can be helpful in distinguishing chronic and acuterenal failure.Renal ultrasound is the essential investigation. Ultrasound will accurately size the kidneys,and identify obvious causes for renal failure such as polycystic kidney disease or obstruc-tion causing bilateral hydronephrosis. Asymmetrically sized kidneys suggest refluxnephropathy or renovascular disease. In this case, ultrasound showed two small (8 cm)echogenic kidneys consistent with long-standing renal failure. A renal biopsy in this caseis not appropriate as biopsies of small kidneys have a high incidence of bleeding compli-cations, and the sample obtained would show extensive glomerular and tubulo-interstitialfibrosis and may not identify the original disease. The patient’s renal failure may have beendue to hypertension, or a primary glomerulonephritis such as IgA nephropathy. African-Caribbeans are more prone to develop hypertensive renal failure than other racial groups.Antihypertensive medications are needed to treat her blood pressure adequately, oral phos-phate binders and vitamin D preparations to control her secondary hyperparathyroidism,and erythropoietin injections to treat her anaemia. The case raises the dilemma of whetherdialysis is appropriate in this patient. Hospital-based haemodialysis or home-based peri-toneal dialysis are the options available. Her age and comorbid illnesses preclude renaltransplantation. Conservative management without dialysis may be appropriate in this case.
24Patients often become symptomatic due to renal failure only when their glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is /H1102115 mL/min, and thus may present with end-stage renal failure.Previous measurements of serum creatinine enable the rate of deterioration of renalfunction to be known.Renal ultrasound is the key imaging investigation
-----
A 27-year-old woman is admitted to the emergency department complaining of painacross her back. She became unwell 2 days previously when she started to develop a feverand an ache in her back. The pain has become progressively more severe. She has vomited twice in the past 6 h. She has had no previous significant medical history, apartfrom an uncomplicated episode of cystitis 3 months ago.

She looks unwell and is flushed. Her temperature is 39. Her pulse is 120 beats/min andblood pressure 104/68 mmHg. 

 of the cardiovascular and respiratory systemsis unremarkable. Her abdomen is generally tender, but most markedly in both loins. Bowelsounds are normal.
25
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 25.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 406/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 134 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4 

 10This woman has the symptoms and signs of acute pyelonephritis. Acute pyelonephritis ismuch more common in women than men, and occurs due to ascent of bacteria up the urin-ary tract. Pregnancy, diabetes mellitus, immunosuppression and structurally abnormal uri-nary tracts increase the likelihood of ascending infection.
26!Pyelonephritis causes loin pain which can be unilateral or bilateral. The differentialdiagnoses of loin pain include obstructive uropathy, renal infarction, renal cellcarcinoma, renal papillary necrosis, renal calculi, glomerulonephritis, polycystickidney disease, medullary sponge kidney and loin-pain haematuria syndrome.Differential diagnosisFever may be as high as 40°C with associated systemic symptoms of anorexia, nausea andvomiting. Some patients may have preceding symptoms of cystitis (dysuria, urinary fre-quency, urgency and haematuria), but these lower urinary tract symptoms do not alwaysoccur in patients with acute pyelonephritis. Many patients will give a history of cystitiswithin the previous 6 months. Elderly patients with pyelonephritis may present with non-specific symptoms and confusion. Pyelonephritis may also mimic other conditions such asacute appendicitis, acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis and lower lobe pneumonia. Thereis usually marked tenderness over the kidneys both posteriorly and anteriorly. Severeuntreated infection may lead on to septic shock.The raised white cell count and CRP are consistent with an acute bacterial infection.Microscopic haematuria, proteinuria and leucocytes in the urine occur because of inflam-mation in the urinary tract. The presence of bacteria in the urine is confirmed by thereduction of nitrates to nitrites.This woman should be admitted. Blood and urine cultures should be taken, and she shouldbe commenced on intravenous fluids and antibiotics, until the organism is identified, andthen an oral antibiotic to which the organism is sensitive can be used. Initial therapycould be with gentamicin and ampicillin, or ciprofloxacin. She should have a renal ultra-sound scan to exclude any evidence of obstruction. In patients with obstructive uropathy,infection may lead to a pyonephrosis with severe loin pain, fever, septic shock and renalfailure. If there is evidence of a hydronephrosis in the context of urinary sepsis, a nephro-stomy should be inserted urgently to prevent these complications.Patients with an uncomplicated renal infection should be treated with a 2-week course ofantibiotics, and then have a repeat culture 10–14 days after treatment has finished to con-firm eradication of infection. In patients with infection complicated by stones, or renalscarring, a 6-week course of treatment should be given.Acute pyelonephritis may present with or without preceding lower urinary tract symptoms.Renal ultrasound should be performed within 24 h of admission to exclude urinary tractobstruction.Antibiotics should be continued for at least 2 weeks in cases of acute pyelonephritis tominimize the risk of relapse
-----
A 64-year-old man goes to his general practitioner (GP) because he has become increas-ingly overweight. He has gained 8 kg in weight over the past 6 months. He has noticedthat he is constantly hungry. He has found that he is bruising easily. He finds it difficultto get up from his armchair or to climb stairs. He feels depressed and finds himself wak-ing early in the mornings. He has had no previous physical or psychiatric illnesses. He isa retired miner and lives with his wife in a terraced house. He smokes 30 cigarettes per dayand drinks 15 units of alcohol per week.

He is overweight particularly in the abdominal region. There are purple stretch marks onhis abdomen and thighs. His skin is thin, and there are spontaneous bruises. His pulse is76/min, regular, and blood pressure 168/104 mmHg. There is peripheral oedema. Otherwise,examination of his heart, respiratory and abdominal systems is normal. His neurologicalexamination is otherwise normal, apart from some weakness in shoulder abduction and hipflexion.
27
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 5.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 237/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 113/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LAlbumin 38 g/L 35–50 g/LGlucose 8 

 11The symptoms and signs of proximal myopathy, striae and truncal obesity are features ofCushing’s syndrome. The hyperglycaemia and hypokalaemia would fit this diagnosis. Inaddition psychiatric disturbances, typically depression, may occur in Cushing’s syndrome.Cushing’s disease is due to a pituitary adenoma secreting adrenocorticotrophic hormone(ACTH). The term ‘Cushing’s syndrome’ is a wider one, and encompasses a group of dis-orders due to overproduction of cortisol.
28ACTH secretion by a basophil adenoma of the anterior pituitary gland (Cushing’sdisease).Ectopic ACTH secretion, e. from a bronchial carcinoma, often causing a massiverelease of cortisol and a severe and rapid onset of symptoms.Primary adenoma/carcinoma of the adrenal cortex (suppressed ACTH).Iatrogenic: corticosteroid treatment. This is the commonest cause in day-to-dayclinical practice.Causes of Cushing’s syndrome!
This patient’s primary presenting complaint is rapid-onset obesity. The principal causes ofobesity are:geneticenvironmental: excessive food intake, lack of exercisehormonal: hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, polycystic ovaries and hyper-prolactinaemiaalcohol-induced pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome.This patient should be investigated by an endocrinologist. The first point is to establish isthat this man has abnormal cortisol secretion. There should be loss of the normal diurnalrhythm with an elevated midnight cortisol level or increased urinary conjugated cortisolexcretion. A dexamethasone suppression test would normally suppress cortisol excretion.It is then important to exclude common causes of abnormal cortisol excretion such asstress/depression or alcohol abuse. Measurement of ACTH levels distinguishes betweenadrenal (low ACTH) and pituitary/ectopic causes (high ACTH). This patient drinks alcoholmoderately and has a normal gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. His depression seems to bea consequence of his cortisol excess rather than a cause, as he has no psychiatric history.He is having problems with stairs and his social circumstances need to be considered, buthis mobility should improve with appropriate treatment.His ACTH level is elevated. Bronchial carcinoma is a possibility as he is a heavy smokerand the onset of his Cushing’s syndrome has been rapid. However his chest X-ray is nor-mal. This can betreated with surgery or radiotherapy Magneticresonance imaging scanthrough the pituitary.Patients with rapid-onset obesity should have endocrine causes excluded.Corticosteroid treatment is the commonest cause for Cushing’s syndrome.Patients with severe and rapid-onset Cushing’s syndrome often have ectopic ACTHsecretion or cortisol-secreting adrenal tumours This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 64-year-old investments manager is causing increasing concern to his wife owing to increasing forgetfulness and irritability. His mother died 3 years previously fromAlzheimer’s disease, and his wife is concerned that he is dementing. She had also noticedthat he has been drinking more fluid and getting up 2–3 times in the night to pass urine.She persuaded him to see their general practitioner (GP) who found no symptoms of pro-statism, and no other relevant past or family history. There was no objective evidence of dementia, and physical examination was normal, including rectal examination.Investigations showed normal urine, fasting blood glucose, urea, creatinine and elec-trolytes. A wait and see policy was advised with as much reduction in stress as possibleand adequate sleep.Over the next 2 months his colleagues begin to question his performance, then one day atwork he collapses with severe and sudden-onset left loin pain, radiating down the leftflank to his groin and left testicle. The pain is colicky and accompanied by nausea andvomiting. He is taken to the emergency department.

The only physical abnormalities are pallor, sweating, and slight left loin tenderness.7 g/dLWhite cell count 9.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 234/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 141 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 111/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LRandom glucose 5.0 mmol/LUrine: – protein;/H11001/H11001/H11001blood 

 12The acute abdominal pain and the haematuria indicate ureteric colic due to a renal stone. Thepolyuria and polydipsia and the mental changes point to hypercalcaemia causing all threeproblems. His serum calcium was raised at 3.3 mmol/L (normal range: 2.65 mmol/L), cor-rected for serum albumin concentration, the phosphate was reduced at 0.6 mmol/L (normalrange: 0.45 mmol/L)) and the alkaline phosphatase raised at 587 IU/L (normal range:30–300 IU/L ). This combination of abnormal bone chemistry indicates hyperparathyroidismas the cause of the hypercalcaemia, confirmed by a raised serum parathormone (PTH), and a radio-isotope scan showing a single parathyroid tumour. Other investigations were a renal ultrasound showing a normal urinary tract with no detectable stones. It was assumedthat the patient had passed a small stone at the time of the ureteric colic and haematuria. Askeletal X-ray survey was normal, showing no bony metastases and no bony changes ofhyperparathyroidism.Hypercalcaemia of any cause can cause polyuria and polydipsia, and can affect mentalfunction. Long-standing hypercalcaemia (therefore not usually in the case of malignancy)also causes renal stones. For some reason primary hyperparathyroidism causes eitherstones or bone disease, rarely both together.
32HypothyroidismVitamin B12deficiencyUraemiaHypercalcaemiaMetabolic causes of dementia!
Underlying causes of mental disease must be sought and not ascribed to ageing.In a patient with a history of ureteric colic, failure to demonstrate stone(s) in the urinarytract does not exclude nephrolothiasis
-----
A 67-year-old man is referred to a neurologist by his general practitioner (GP). His symp-toms are of weakness and wasting of the muscles of his left hand. He has noticed theweakness is worse after using his hand, for example after using a screwdriver. He has alsonoticed cramps in his forearm muscles. His speech is slightly slurred and he has startedchoking after taking fluids. Past medical history is notable for hypertension for 15 yearsand a myocardial infarction 3 years previously. Medication consists of simvastatin, aspirinand atenolol. He is a retired university lecturer. He lives with his wife and they have twogrown up children. He is a non-smoker and drinks a bottle of wine a week.

Blood pressure is 146/88 mmHg. There are no abnormalities to be found in the cardiovas-cular or respiratory systems or the abdomen. There is some wasting of the muscles in theupper limbs, particularly in the left hand. There is some fasciculation in the muscles of theupper arms bilaterally. Power is globally reduced in the left hand, and also slightlyreduced in the right hand. Muscle tone is normal. The biceps and triceps jerks are briskbilaterally. There is no sensory loss. There is slight dysarthria 

 13This man has motor neurone disease. This is a degenerative disease of unknown causethat affects the motor neurones of the spinal cord, the cranial nerve nuclei, and the motorcortex. The disease usually presents between the ages of 50 and 70 years.Weakness and wasting of the muscles of one hand or arm is the commonest presentation.Weakness is most marked after exertion. Painful cramps of the forearm muscles are com-mon in the early phases of the disease. Patients may present with lower limb weakness orwith dyarthria or dysphagia. The characteristic physical sign of this condition is fascicu-lation, which is an irregular rapid contraction of segments of muscle, caused by denerva-tion of the muscle from a lower motor neurone lesion. Reflexes can be brisk due to loss ofcortical motor neurones. There is no sensory loss.In advanced cases diagnosis is easy, but early cases are more problematic. Limb weaknessworsening with fatigue may be confused with myasthenia gravis. Dysphagia and dysarthriain the elderly are much more commonly due to the pseudobulbar palsy of cerebrovasculardisease. Cervical myelopathy is another common cause of wasting and fasciculation of theupper limbs without sensory loss. Brachial plexus lesions from trauma or invasion by anapical lung tumour (Pancoast tumour) may affect one arm. A predominant motor periph-eral neuropathy causes a symmetrical pattern of weakness and reflexes are reduced.Unfortunately motor neurone disease is a progressive and incurable condition. Patientstend to develop a spastic weakness of the legs. Bulbar palsy causes dysarthria and dys-phasia. Sphincter function is usually not affected. Intellect is generally not affected.There is no curative treatment for this condition. The mean duration of survival from presentation is between 2 and 4 years. The patient and his family will have to be told ofthe diagnosis and prognosis. Support must be given by a multidisciplinary team. As the disease progresses and speech deteriorates communication may be helped by using com-puters. A feeding gastrostomy may be required to enable adequate calorie intake. Non-invasive ventilation can be used to help respiratory failure, but death usually occurs frombronchopneumonia.
34Motor neurone disease most commonly presents with weakness and wasting of the muscles of one hand.Fasciculation of the muscles is characteristic of this condition.There is no sensory loss in this condition
-----
A 43-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of diplopia,more marked in the evenings, for the last 3 months. She has noticed difficulty holding herhead up, again especially in the evenings. She has problems finishing a meal because ofdifficulty chewing. Her husband and friends have noticed that her voice has become qui-eter. She has lost about 3 kg in weight in the past 6 months. The woman has had no sig-nificant previous medical illnesses. She lives with her husband and three children. She isa non-smoker and drinks about 15 units of alcohol per week. She is taking no regularmedication.

She looks well, and examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal systemsis normal. Power in all muscle groups is grossly normal but seems to decrease after testinga movement repetitively. Tone, coordination, reflexes and sensation are normal. Bilateralptosis is present and is exacerbated by prolonged upward gaze. Pupillary reflexes, eyemovements and funduscopy are normal 

 14This woman’s generalized weakness is due to myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis isdue to the presence of acetylcholine receptor antibodies causing impaired neuromusculartransmission. It characteristically affects the external ocular, bulbar, neck and shouldergirdle muscles. Weakness is worse after repetitive movements which cause acetylcholinedepletion from the presynaptic terminals. The onset is usually gradual. Ptosis of the upperlids is often associated with diplopia due to weakness of the external ocular muscles.Speech may become soft when the patient is tired. Symptoms are usually worse in theevenings and better in the mornings. Permanent paralysis eventually develops in somemuscle groups. In severe cases respiratory weakness occurs.
36!Motor neurone disease: suggested clinically by muscle fasciculation and later bymarked muscle weakness.Muscular dystrophies: selective muscular weakness occurs in specific diseases, e.facioscapulohumeral dystrophy. There is usually a family history.Dystrophia myotonica: this causes ptosis, wasting of the masseter, temporal andsternomastoid muscles and distal muscular atrophy. There is a characteristic facialappearance with frontal baldness, expressionless facies and sunken cheeks. Theremay be gonadal atrophy and mental retardation. There is usually a family history.The electromyogram (EMG) is diagnostic.Polymyositis: this may have an acute or chronic onset. A skin rash and joint painsare common. The creatine kinase level is raised and a muscle biopsy is diagnostic.Miscellaneous myopathies: thyrotoxic, hypothyroid, Cushing’s, alcoholic.Non-metastatic associations of malignancy: thymoma is associated with myastheniagravis in 10 per cent of cases; the Eaton–Lambert myasthenic syndrome isassociated with small-cell lung carcinoma.Differential diagnoses of generalized muscle weakness
This patient should be investigated by a neurologist. Electromyography (EMG) will demon-strate fatiguability in response to repetitive supramaximal stimulation. Intravenous injectionof edrophonium (Tensilon) will increase muscular power for a few minutes. Blood shouldbe assayed for acetylcholine receptor antibodies (present in 90 per cent). A computedtomography (CT) of the thorax should be performed to detect the presence of a thymomaor lung cancer. Corticosteroids are the drugs of first choice. Anticholinesterase drugsgreatly improve muscle power but have many side-effects. Thymectomy should be con-sidered. It is most effective within 5 years of diagnosis and when there is no thymoma.Myasthenia gravis is a cause of abnormal muscular fatiguability.In its initial stages it affects certain characteristic muscle groups
-----
A 35-year-old man is seen in the emergency department because he has developed apainful, swollen right knee. This has occurred rapidly over the past 36 h. There is no his-tory of trauma to the knee or previous joint problems. He feels generally unwell and hasalso noticed his eyes are sore. He has had no significant previous medical illnesses. He ismarried with two children. He is a non-smoker and drinks about 15 units of alcohol perweek. He is a businessman and returned 3 weeks ago from a business trip to Thailand.

His temperature is 38. Both eyes appear red. There is a brown macular rash on hispalms and soles. 

 of cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and neurologicalsystems is normal. His right knee is swollen, hot and tender with limitation in flexion. Noother joint appears to be affected.
37
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 13.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 345/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 64 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4 

 15This patient has a monoarthropathy, a rash and red eyes. Investigations show a raisedwhite cell count and ESR. The diagnosis in this man was postinfective inflammatorymucositis and arthritis, often shortened to reactive arthritis, and also known as Reiter’ssyndrome.However there is now a move to disassociate the name of Reiter (1881–1969)from this disease in view of his crimes committed, as a doctor, by experimenting on pris-oners in the concentration camps of Nazi Germany. This disease classically presents witha triad of symptoms (although all three may not always be present):seronegative arthritis affecting mainly lower limb jointsconjunctivitisnon-specific urethritis.The trigger can be non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU) or certain bowel infections. This patientis likely to have contracted NGU after sexual intercourse in Thailand. On direct questioninghe admitted to the presence of a urethral discharge. The acute arthritis is typically amonoarthritis but can develop into a chronic relapsing destructive arthritis affecting theknees and feet, and causing a sacroiliitis and spondylitis. Tendinitis and plantar fasciitis mayoccur. The red eyes are due to conjunctivitis and anterior uveitis, and can recur with flaresof the arthritis. The rash on the patient’s palmar surfaces is the characteristic brown macu-lar rash of this condition – keratoderma blenorrhagica. Other features of this condition thatare sometimes seen include nail dystrophy and a circinate balanitis. Systemic manifestationssuch as pericarditis, pleuritis, fever and lymphadenopathy may occur in this disease. TheESR is usually elevated.
38!Gonococcal arthritis: occasionally a polyarthritis affecting the small joints of thehands and wrists, with a pustular rash.Acute septic arthritis: the patient looks ill and septic and the skin over the joint isvery erythematous.Other seronegative arthritides: ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy.Viral arthritis: usually polyarticular.Acute rheumatoid arthritis: usually polyarticular.Acute gout: most commonly affects the metatarsophalangeal joints.Pseudogout: caused by sodium pyrophosphate crystals; often affects large joints inolder patients.Lyme disease: caused by Borrelia burgdorfiiinfection transmitted by a tick bite; mayhave the characteristic skin rash – erythema chronicum migrans.Haemorrhagic arthritis: usually a history of trauma or bleeding disorder.Differential diagnoses of an acute monoarthritis
This patient should have urethral swabs taken to exclude chlamydial/gonococcal infections,and the appropriate antibiotics given. His knee should be aspirated. A Gram stain willexclude a pyogenic infection and birefringent microscopy can be used to detect uric acidor pyrophosphate crystals. This patient should be given non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for the pain and he may require bed rest. If his disease relapses he should bereferred to a rheumatologist. He and his wife should be referred to the sexually transmitteddisease clinic for counselling and testing for other sexually transmitted diseases such ashepatitis B, HIV and syphilis.
39The most likely causes of an acute large joint monoarthritis are a septic arthritis and aseronegative arthritis.Septic arthritis must be recognized and treated as a medical emergency
-----
An 80-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) with pain and swelling inher left knee. The pain began 2 days previously and she says that the knee is now hot,swollen and painful on movement. In the past she has a history of mild osteoarthritis ofthe hips. She has occasional heartburn and indigestion. She had a health check 6 monthspreviously and was told that everything was fine except for some elevation of her bloodpressure which was 172/102 mmHg and her creatinine level, which was around the upperlimit of normal. The blood pressure was checked several times over the next 4 weeks andfound to be persistently elevated and she was started on treatment with 2.5 mg ben-drofluamethizide. The last blood pressure reading was 138/84 mmHg. There is no relevantfamily history. She has never smoked and her alcohol consumption averages four unitsper week. She takes occasional paracetamol for hip pain.

Her blood pressure is 142/86 mmHg. The temperature is 37.5°C and the pulse 88/min.There is grade 2 hypertensive retinopathy. There is no other abnormality on cardiovascu-lar or respiratory examination. In the hands there are Heberden’s nodes over the distalinterphalangeal joints.The left knee is hot and swollen with evidence of effusion in the joint with a positivepatellar tap. There is pain on flexion beyond 90 degrees. The right knee appears normal.
40
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLWhite cell count 12.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 384/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 48 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 116/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 10 X-ray of bothknees 

 16The clinical picture is one of acute monoarthritis. The patient has a history of some hippains but this and the Heberden’s nodes are common findings in an 80-year-old woman,related to osteoarthritis. The blood results show a raised white cell count and ESR, a raisedblood sugar, and renal function at the upper limit of normal.
42!The differential diagnosis includes trauma, septic arthritis, gout and pseudogout.Differential diagnoses of pain in the kneeThe recent introduction of a thiazide diuretic for treatment of the hypertension increasesthe suspicion of gout. Pseudogout is caused by deposition of calcium pyrophosphate crys-tals and would be expected to show calcification in the articular cartilage in the kneejoint. The X-rays here show some joint space narrowing but no calcification in the articu-lar cartilage. The fever, high white cell count and ESR are compatible with acute gout. Theraised glucose may also be a side-effect of thiazide diuretics. If this remains after the acutearthritis has subsided then it may need further treatment. Precipitation of gout by thi-azides is more likely in older women, particularly in the presence of renal impairment anddiabetes. It may involve the hands, be polyarticular and can affect existing Heberden’snodes.The serum uric acid level is likely to be raised, but this occurs commonly without evidenceof acute gout. The definitive investigation is aspiration of the joint. The fluid should besent for culture and inspection for crystals. A high white cell count would be expected inan acute inflammatory arthritis. The diagnosis is made from the needle-like crystals ofuric acid which are negatively birefringent under polarized light, unlike the positivelybirefringent crystals of calcium pyrophosphate.In this case the pain in the joint was partly relieved by the aspiration. Treatment with anon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug should be covered by a proton pump inhibitor inview of her history of heartburn and indigestion. The thiazide diuretic was changed to anangiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor as treatment for her hypertension, and the bloodglucose settled.A careful drug history is an essential part of the history.Thiazide diuretics can precipitate diabetes and gout, especially in the elderly
-----
A 36-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of spont-aneous bruising mainly on her legs. The bruising has been noticeable over the last 4–6weeks. She cannot remember any episodes of trauma. In addition her last two menstrualperiods have been abnormally heavy, and she has suffered a major nosebleed. She other-wise feels well, and is working full time as a secretary. There is no significant past med-ical history. She is married with one daughter aged 11 years. There is no family history ofa bleeding disorder. She is a non-smoker and drinks a small amount of alcohol socially.

On examination there are multiple areas of purpura on her legs and to a lesser extent onher abdomen and arms. The purpuric lesions vary in colour from black–purple to yellow.There are no signs of anaemia, but there are two bullae in the mouth and there is spontan-eous bleeding from the gums. There are no retinal haemorrhages on funduscopy. Bloodpressure is 118/72 mmHg. 

 of the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominalsystems is unremarkable.
43
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 83 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 4/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 76/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 17This woman has spontaneous bruising due to idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).She has profound thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 4/H11003109/L. An increased ten-dency to bleed or bruise can be due either to platelet, coagulation or blood vessel abnor-malities. Platelet/vessel wall defects cause spontaneous purpura in the skin and mucousmembranes or immediately after trauma. Coagulation defects cause haematomas andhaemarthroses usually with a time delay after trauma. A positive family history or earlyonset of bleeding suggests haemophilia. The distribution of bruising may suggest thediagnosis. Thrombocytopenic purpura is most evident over the ankles and pressure areas.Retinal haemorrhages tend to occur if there is a combination of severe thrombocytopeniaand anaemia. Senile purpura and steroid-induced bruising occur mainly on the forearmsand backs of the hands. Henoch–Schönlein purpura typically occurs over the extensoraspects of the limbs and buttocks. Scurvy causes bleeding from the gums and around thehair follicles. Non-accidental injury in children can present with bruising.ITP usually occurs in young and middle-aged women. In addition to the purpuric lesionsin the skin there may be menorrhagia, epistaxes or occult or overt gastrointestinal haem-orrhage. In this woman’s case there is a mild normochromic normocytic anaemia due torecent blood loss. Splenomegaly is usually absent.The causes of thrombocytopenia can be divided into disorders of reduced production ofplatelets or decreased survival of platelets. Decreased production of platelets can be due tomarrow infiltration, for example by leukaemia or malignancy, or as a result of toxins, forexample alcohol, drugs (e. chemotherapy), radiation or viruses (e. cytomegalovirus [CMV]).Platelet survival is reduced in ITP due to antibodies directed against the platelets. Secondarycauses of ITP include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), lymphoma, drugs such as quinine,heparin and alpha-methyldopa and hypersplenism. Platelet consumption is increased in dis-seminated intravascular coagulation and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).The patient should be immediately referred to a haematology unit. Platelet transfusion is usu-ally given if there is significant bleeding or the platelet count is less than 15/H11003109/L to pre-vent a major spontaneous bleed. Investigations include assaying for platelet-associatedimmunoglobulin G (IgG), excluding other causes of thrombocytopenia such as SLE and per-forming a bone marrow aspirate. In this case it will show increased numbers of megakary-ocytes consistent with increased platelet turnover. The platelet count in ITP normally will riserapidly after commencement of either corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulin. Thedisease often runs a remitting and relapsing course. Splenectomy may be necessary.
44The distribution of purpura can aid the diagnosis.A family history, early onset or a history of haemarthroses suggest a diagnosis ofhaemophilia.In severe cases of ITP, urgent treatment is necessary to prevent a life-threatening haemorrhage
-----
A 63-year-old woman goes to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of extreme tired-ness. She has been increasingly fatigued over the past year but in recent weeks she hasbecome breathless on exertion, light-headed and complained of headaches. Her feet havebecome numb and she has started to become unsteady on her feet. She has had no signifi-cant previous medical illnesses. She is a retired teacher and lives alone. Until the last 2 years she was active, walking 3 or 4 miles a day. She is a non-smoker and drinks about15 units of alcohol per week. She is taking no regular medication. Her mother and one ofher two sisters have thyroid problems.

Her conjunctivae are pale and sclerae are yellow. Her temperature is 37. Her pulse rateis 96/min regular, and blood pressure 142/72 mmHg. 

 of her cardiovascular,respiratory and abdominal systems is normal. She has a symmetrical distal weaknessaffecting her arms and legs. Knee and ankle jerks are absent and she has extensor plantarresponses. She has sensory loss in a glove and stocking distribution with a particularlysevere loss of joint position sense.
45
NormalHaemoglobin 4.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 112 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 3.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 102/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 92/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 18This patient has a severe macrocytic anaemia and neurological signs due to vitamin B12defi-ciency. There is a family history of thyroid disease. This can cause a macrocytic anaemia butnot to this degree, and hypothyroidism would not explain the other features. Anaemia reducestissue oxygenation and therefore can affect most organ systems. The symptoms and signs ofanaemia depend on its rapidity of onset. Chronic anaemia causes fatigue and pallor of themucous membranes. Cardiorespiratory symptoms and signs include breathlessness, chest pain,claudication, tachycardia, oedema and other signs of cardiac failure. Gastrointestinal symp-toms include anorexia, weight loss, nausea and constipation. There may be menstrual irregu-larities and loss of libido. Neurological symptoms include headache, dizziness and cramps.There may be a low-grade fever. In pernicious anaemia, the MCV can rise to 100–140 fL, andoval macrocytes are seen on the blood film. The reticulocyte count is inappropriately low forthe degree of anaemia. The white cell count is usually moderately reduced. There is often amild rise in serum bilirubin giving the patient a ‘lemon-yellow’ complexion. As in this patient,profound vitamin B12deficiency also causes a peripheral neuropathy and subacute degenera-tion of the posterior columns and pyramidal tracts in the spinal cord, causing a sensory lossand increased difficulty walking. The peripheral neuropathy and pyramidal tract involvementproduce the combination of absent ankle jerks and upgoing plantars. In its most extreme formit can lead to paraplegia, optic atrophy and dementia. Vitamin B12is synthesized by micro-organisms and is obtained by ingesting animal or vegetable products contaminated by bacte-ria. After ingestion, it is bound by intrinsic factor, synthesized by gastric parietal cells, and thiscomplex is then absorbed in the terminal ileum. Vitamin B12deficiency is most commonly ofa gastric cause (pernicious anaemia due to an autoimmune atrophic gastritis; total gastrec-tomy), bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine destroying intrinsic factor, or a malabsorp-tion from the terminal ileum (surgical resection; Crohn’s disease).
46!Folate deficiencyExcessive alcohol consumptionHypothyroidismCertain drugs, e. azathioprine, methotrexatePrimary acquired sideroblastic anaemia and myelodysplastic syndromesDifferential diagnoses of macrocytic anaemia
Vitamin B12deficiency may occur in strict vegetarians who eat no dairy produce.Typical neurological signs are position and vibration sense impairment in the legs,absent reflexes and extensor plantars.Overenthusiastic blood transfusion should be avoided since it can provoke cardiac failure in vitamin B12deficiency.
A full dietary history should be taken. Vegans who omit all animal products from their dietoften have subclinical vitamin B12deficiency. Serum vitamin B12and folate levels shouldbe measured and antibodies to intrinsic factor and parietal cells should be assayed. Intrinsicfactor antibodies are virtually specific for pernicious anaemia but are only present in about50 per cent of cases. Parietal cell antibody is present in 85–90 per cent of patients with per-nicious anaemia but can also occur in patients with other causes of atrophic gastritis. A radioactive B12absorption test (Schilling test) distinguishes gastric from intestinal causesof deficiency. Rapid correction of vitamin B12is essential using intramuscular hydroxy-cobalamin to prevent cardiac failure and further neurological damage
-----
A 24-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) with a fever. This has beenpresent on and off for 3 days. On the first day he felt a little shaky but by the third day hefelt very unwell with the fever and had a feeling of intense cold with generalized shakingat the same time. He felt very sweaty. The whole episode lasted for 2.5 h, and he feltdrained and unwell afterwards. He felt off his food.There is a previous history of hepatitis 4 years earlier and he had glandular fever at theage of 18 years. He smokes 15–20 cigarettes each day and occasionally smokes marijuana.He denies any intravenous drug abuse. He drinks around 14 units of alcohol each week.He has taken no other medication except for malaria prophylaxis. He denies any homo-sexual contacts. He has had a number of heterosexual contacts each year but says that allhad been with protected intercourse. He had returned from Nigeria 3 weeks earlier andwas finishing off his prophylactic malaria regime. He had been in Nigeria for 6 weeks aspart of his job working for an oil company and had no illnesses while he was there.

He looks unwell. His pulse is 94/min, blood pressure 118/72 mmHg. There are no heartmurmurs. There are no abnormalities to find in the respiratory system. In the abdomenthere is some tenderness in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. There are no enlargedlymph nodes.
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 97 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 9.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 6.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 2.8/H11003109/LPlatelets 112/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 134 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 74/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LAlkaline phosphatase 76 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 33 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 42 IU/L 11–51 IU/LBilirubin 28 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LGlucose 4 

 19There is a raised bilirubin with normal liver enzymes, a mild anaemia with a high normalmean corpuscular volume and a low platelet count. This makes a haemolytic anaemialikely. The recent travel to Nigeria raises the possibility of an illness acquired there. Thecommonest such illness causing a fever in the weeks after return is malaria. The incuba-tion period is usually 10–14 days. The mild haemolytic anaemia with a low platelet countwould be typical findings. Slight enlargement of liver and spleen may occur in malaria.The diagnosis should be confirmed by appropriate expert examination of a blood film.The most important feature in this 24-year-old man is the fever with what sound like rigors. He has no other specific symptoms. He looks unwell with a tachycardia and sometenderness in the left upper quadrant which could be related to splenic enlargement.Malaria prophylaxis is often not taken regularly. Even when it is, it does not provide com-plete protection against malaria which should always be suspected in circumstances suchas those described here. The risk might be assessed further by finding which parts ofNigeria he spent his time in and whether he remembered mosquito bites. Measures toavoid mosquito bites such as nets, insect repellants and suitable clothing are an importantpart of prevention.He has no history of intravenous drug abuse or recent risky sexual contact to suggest HIVinfection, although this could not be ruled out. HIV seroconversion can produce a fever-ish illness but not usually as severe as this. Later in HIV infection an AIDS-related illnesswould often be associated with a low total lymphocyte count, but this is normal in hiscase. Other acute viral or bacterial infections are possible but are less likely to explain theabnormal results of some investigations.The diagnostic test for malaria is staining of a peripheral blood film with a Wright orGiemsa stain. In this case it showed that around 1 per cent of red cells contained parasites.Treatment depends on the likely resistance pattern in the area visited and up-to-dateadvice can be obtained by telephone from microbiology departments or tropical diseasehospitals. Falciparum malaria is usually treated with quinine sulphate because of wide-spread resistance to chloroquine. A single dose of Fansidar (pyrimethamine and sulfadox-ine) is given at the end of the quinine course for final eradication of parasites. Howeverthere is increasing resistance to quinine, and artemesinin derivatives are increasinglybecoming the first-line treatment for falciparum malaria. In severe cases hyponatraemiaand hypoglycaemia may occur and the sodium here is marginally low. Most of the severecomplications are associated with Plasmodium falciparummalaria. They include cerebralmalaria, lung involvement, severe haemolysis and acute renal failure.No prophylactic regime is certain to prevent malaria.A traveller returning from a malaria endemic region who develops a fever has malariauntil proven otherwise.Treatment should be guided by advice from tropical disease centres.If the malaria species is unknown or the infection mixed, treat as falciparum malaria This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 33-year-old woman is admitted to hospital because of general fatigue, fever and weightloss. She has lost 5 kg in weight over the last 3 months. She has felt increasingly fatiguedand has a poor appetite. Over the past few weeks she has felt as if she was feverish andhas developed night sweats. She has no chest pain or shortness of breath. She and her twochildren, aged 4 and 6 years, have come from Nigeria to visit her husband who has beenin this country for 2 years. She has visited the UK twice before. She has had occasionalfevers over the last 10 years and these have been treated presumptively as malaria with agood response. She has been otherwise well, although her periods have been irregular overthe last 3 months. She has had no other serious medical illnesses. She is a non-smoker anddrinks no alcohol. The ward receptionist has suggested that she is not entitled to NHStreatment.

She is thin and looks unwell. Her temperature is 38. There are no abnormalities in thecardiovascular or respiratory systems and there are no lymph nodes palpable. Her con-junctivae look pale. Physical examination is otherwise normal.
50
NormalHaemoglobin 8.7g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 12.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 10.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 0.8/H11003109/LPlatelets 97/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate 87 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 134 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4  

 20This patient has fever, marked weight loss and a leucoerythroblastic anaemia. The length ofthe symptoms makes infections such as malaria unlikely, although this should be checkedsince she arrived from Nigeria and combined infections are possible. A very importantfinding is that immature red and white cells are seen in the peripheral blood. This leuco-erythroblastic anaemia indicates bone-marrow replacement by tumour or infection forcingimmature cells out into the blood. This woman has miliary tuberculosis. Miliary tubercu-losis is characterized by tuberculous granulomata throughout the body due to widespreaddissemination of tubercle bacilli. It is now usually seen in elderly persons and the diagno-sis is often only made at autopsy. The chest X-ray shows miliary lesions (multiple smallnodules 2–5 mm in diameter). These are often subtle or not visible at presentation. Theremay be choroidal tubercles in the eyes on funduscopy and hepatosplenomegaly.!Other infections: visceral abscesses, infective endocarditis, specific organisms (e.brucellosis, actinomycosis or toxoplasmosis) and tropical diseases (e. malaria ortrypanosomiasis).Neoplastic diseases: lymphomas, renal cell carcinomas, pancreatic tumours.Collagen vascular diseases, e. systemic vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemiclupus erythematosus, temporal arteritis.Miscellaneous: recurrent pulmonary emboli, drug fever, sarcoidosis.Differential diagnoses of fevers/H110223 weeks
This patient needs an urgent diagnosis. Bronchoscopy with lavage may reveal acid-fastbacilli. Biopsy of her liver and bone marrow may show tubercle bacilli or caseating gran-ulomas. The tissue should also be sent for culture. The tuberculin test may be negativebecause of immunoincompetence induced by the disease. Antituberculous treatment withfour agents must be started immediately once biopsy material has been obtained. In awoman of child-bearing age a pregnancy test should be done, particularly in the face ofmenstrual irregularities. In severely ill patients corticosteroids are of benefit. The totallymphocyte count is low and, in a patient from Africa, HIV infection is a distinct possi-bility. Informed consent should be sought for an HIV test. Tuberculosis is a notifiable dis-ease and the diagnosis should be notified and arrangements made to screen her childrenand any other close contacts.Although eligibility for treatment needs to be assessed by appropriate managers, thiswoman has an acute life-threatening illness and is a potential infective risk to others.Investigation and treatment should be undertaken in the normal way.Miliary tuberculosis is often missed as a cause of weight loss and fever in the elderly.Miliary tuberculosis may present with a leucoerythroblastic anaemia.Always culture biopsy material in patients with pyrexias of unknown origin GENERAL SELF-ASSESSMENTCASESSection 2 This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 55-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP), complaining of lack of energy.He has become increasingly tired over the past 18 months. He works as a solicitor anddescribes episodes where he has fallen asleep in his office. He is unable to stay awake after9.30 pm, and sleeps through until 7. He finds it difficult to concentrate at work, andhas stopped playing his weekly game of tennis. He had an episode of depression 10 yearsago related to the break-up of his first marriage. He has no current personal problems. Hehas had no other major illnesses. His brother developed type 1 diabetes mellitus at the ageof 13. On direct questioning, he has noticed that he has become more constipated but deniesany abdominal pain or rectal bleeding. He has put on 8 kg in weight over the past year.

On examination he is overweight. His facial skin is dry and scaly. His pulse is 56/min, regu-lar and blood pressure 146/88 mmHg. 

 of his cardiovascular, respiratory andabdominal systems is unremarkable. Neurological examination was not performed.
55
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 92 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 154/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 140 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmolCreatinine 125/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1.45 mmol/LCholesterol 6.0 mmol/LTriglycerides 1 

 21Fatigue is a very common symptom of both physical and mental illness. The differential diag-nosis is extensive and includes cancer, depression, anaemia, renal failure and endocrine dis-eases. In this case the main differential diagnoses are depression and hypothyroidism. He hasa past history of depression, but currently has no obvious triggers for a further episode ofdepression. He is not waking early in the morning or having difficulty getting to sleep, whichare common biological symptoms of severe depression. There are a number of clues in thiscase to the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Insidious onset of fatigue, difficulty concentrating,increased somnolence, constipation and weight gain are features of hypothyroidism. As inthis case there may be a family or past medical history of other autoimmune diseases such astype 1 diabetes mellitus, vitiligo or Addison’s disease. Hypothyroidism typically presents inthe fifth or sixth decade, and is about five times more common in women than men. Obstruct-ive sleep apnoea is associated with hypothyroidism and may contribute to daytime sleepinessand fatigue.On examination the facial appearances and bradycardia are consistent with the diagnosis.Characteristically patients with overt hypothyroidism have dry, scaly, cold and thickenedskin. There may be a malar flush against the background of the pale facial appearance(‘strawberries and cream appearance’). Scalp hair is usually brittle and sparse, and theremay be thinning of the lateral third of the eyebrows. Bradycardia may occur and the apexbeat may be difficult to locate because of the presence of a pericardial effusion. A classicsign of hypothyroidism is the delayed relaxation phase of the ankle jerk. Other neuro-logical syndromes which may occur in association with hypothyroidism include carpaltunnel syndrome, a cerebellar sydrome or polyneuritis. Patients may present with psychi-atric illnesses including psychoses (‘myxoedema madness’).Clues to the diagnosis in the investigations are the normochromic, normocytic anaemia,marginally raised creatinine, and hypercholesterolaemia. The anaemia of hypothyroidismis typically normochromic, normocytic or macrocytic; microcytic anaemia may occur ifthere is menorrhagia. A macrocytic anaemia may represent undiagnosed vitamin B12defi-ciency. Renal blood flow is reduced in hypothyroidism, and this can cause the creatinineto be slightly above the normal range.The most severe cases of hypothyroidism present with myxoedema coma, with bradycar-dia, reduced respiratory rate and severe hypothermia. Typically, shivering is absent.In this case the thyroid function tests were as follows: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)73 mU/L (normal range: /H110216m U / L ) ;  f r e e  t h y r o x i n e  ( T4) 3 pmol/L (normal range 9–22 pmol/L).The high TSH indicates primary hypothyroidism rather than hypopituitarism. The most common cause of hypothyroidism is autoimmune thyroiditis and the patient should havethyroid autoantibodies assayed.
56PanhypopituitarismAutoimmune thyroiditisPost-thyroidectomyPost-radio-iodine treatment for thyrotoxicosisDrugs for treatment of hyperthyroidism: carbimazole, propylthiouracilAmiodarone, lithiumDietary iodine deficiencyInherited enzyme defectsCauses of hypothyroidism! Treatment is with T4at a maintenance dose of 75–200/H9262g/day. Response is measured clin-ically and biochemically by the return of TSH to the normal range. Elderly patients orthose with coronary heart disease should be started cautiously on T4because of the risk ofprecipitating myocardial ischaemia.
57Hypothyroidism should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any patient pre-senting with fatigue.A neurological examination should be part of the routine assessment of such patients.Clinical symptoms of hypothyroidism are usually non-specific.Hypothyroidism may present in unusual ways such as psychoses or decreased consciouslevel.Autoimmune thyroiditis is the commonest cause of hypothyroidism This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 72-year-old man goes to his general practitioner (GP) complaining of painless swellingof both legs which he first noted approximately 2 months ago. The swelling started at theankles but now his legs, thighs and genitals are swollen. His face is puffy in the morningson getting up. His weight is up by about 10 kg over the previous 3 months. He has noticedthat his urine appears to be frothy in the toilet. He has noted gradual increasing shortnessof breath, but denies any chest pain. He has also developed spontaneous bruising over thepast 6 months. He is a retired heavy goods vehicle driver. He had hypertension diagnosed13 years ago, and a myocardial infarction 4 years previously. He lives with his wife andhas no children. He continues to smoke 30 cigarettes a day, and drinks about 30 units ofalcohol a week. His medication consists of atenolol 50 mg once a day.

On examination there is pitting oedema of the legs which is present to the level of thesacrum. There is also massive oedema of the penis and scrotum. There is bruising on theforearms and around the eyes. There are no signs of chronic liver disease. His pulse rate is72/min and regular. Blood pressure is 166/78 mmHg. His jugular venous pressure is raisedat 5 cm. His apex beat is not displaced, and auscultation reveals normal heart sounds andno murmurs. There is dullness to percussion and reduced air entry at both lung bases. Theliver, spleen and kidneys are not palpable, but ascites is demonstrated by shifting dullnessand fluid thrill. Neurological examination is unremarkable.
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 95 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 176/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmolCreatinine 112/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LAlbumin 16 g/L 35–50 g/LCholesterol 15.0 mmol/LTriglycerides 2 

 22Peripheral oedema may occur due to local obstruction of lymphatic or venous outflow, orbecause of cardiac, renal, pulmonary or liver disease. Unilateral oedema is most likely tobe due to a local problem, whereas bilateral leg oedema is usually due to one of the med-ical conditions listed above. Pitting oedema needs to be distinguished from lymphoedemawhich is characteristically non-pitting. This is tested by firm pressure with the thumb forapproximately 10 s. If the oedema is pitting, an indentation will be present after pressureis removed. This man has a subacute onset of massive pitting oedema. The major differ-ential diagnoses are cardiac failure, renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, right heart failure(cor pulmonale) secondary to chronic obstructive airways disease or decompensated chronicliver disease. The frothy urine is a clue to the diagnosis of nephrotic syndromeand is com-monly noted by patients with heavy proteinuria.On examination there were no clinical signs to suggest chronic liver disease. The jugularvenous pressure would be expected to be more raised, and there should have been signsof tricuspid regurgitation (prominent ‘v’ wave, pansystolic murmur loudest on inspiration)and cardiomegaly if the patient had cor pulmonale or biventricular cardiac failure. Thepatient has signs of bilateral pleural effusions which may occur in nephrotic syndrome, ifthere is sufficient fluid retention. The bruising and peri-orbital purpura is classically seenin patients with nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis.The investigations are consistent with the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome. Nephroticsyndrome is defined by the triad of hypoalbuminaemia (/H1102130 g/L), proteinuria (/H110223 g/24 h),and hypercholesterolaemia. The normochromic, normocytic anaemia is typical of chronicdisease and is a clue to the underlying diagnosis of amyloidosis. Patients with amyloido-sis may have raised serum transaminase levels due to liver infiltration by amyloid.The patient should have a renal biopsy to delineate the cause of the nephrotic syndrome. Theprincipal causes of nephrotic syndrome are listed below. Adults presenting with nephrotic syn-drome should have a renal biopsy. The exception is the patient with long-standing diabetesmellitus, with concomitant retinopathy and neuropathy, who almost certainly has diabeticnephropathy.
60Diabetes mellitusMinimal change diseaseFocal and segmental glomerulosclerosisMembranous nephropathySystemic lupus erythematosusHIV infectionAmyloidosis/myelomaCauses of nephrotic syndrome!
In this case renal biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of amyloidosis, and staining was posi-tive for lambda light chains. Immunofixation confirmed the presence of a IgG/H9261parapro-tein in the blood. A bone marrow aspirate showed the presence of an excessive number ofplasma cells, consistent with an underlying plasma cell dyscrasia. Patients with amyloi-dosis should have an echocardiogram to screen for cardiac infiltration, and if the facilitiesare available a serum amyloid P scan should be arranged which assesses the distributionand total body burden of amyloid The initial treatment of this patient involves fluid and salt restriction, and diuretics to reducethe oedema. He should be anticoagulated to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis or pul-monary embolus. His hyperlipidaemia should be treated with a statin. Definitive treatmentis by chemotherapy supervised by the haematologists to suppress the amyloidogenic plasmacell clone. In younger patients, bone marrow transplantation may be considered. Patientswith nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis usually progress to end-stage renal fail-ure relatively quickly. Death is most commonly due to cardiac involvement.1Serum amyloid P scan showing uptake predominantly in the spleen.
Bilateral oedema may be due to cardiac, liver or renal disease.All patients presenting with new-onset oedema should have a urinalysis.Patients with nephrotic syndrome are at increased risk of pulmonary embolism This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 65-year-old man goes to his general practitioner (GP) complaining of diarrhoea. This haddeveloped suddenly 2 days previously. His motions are watery and foul-smelling. There isno blood or mucus in the stool. There is colicky abdominal pain not relieved by defaeca-tion. The man has a poor appetite and feels nauseated. The man has recentlyretired, and returned 2 weeks ago from a coach trip to Eastern Europe and Russia. No oneelse on the coach was ill during the holiday. He is otherwise well, with no significant med-ical history. He smokes 10 cigarettes a day, and drinks two pints of beer a day. 

is unremarkable, and the GP diagnoses ‘traveller’s diarrhoea’, and prescribes loperamide.Two weeks later the patient returns to the surgery. The diarrhoea has persisted and thepatient has lost 6 kg in weight.

On examination the patient looks well. His blood pressure is 158/88 mmHg. Cardiovascular,respiratory and abdominal examinations are unremarkable 

 23This patient has diarrhoea and weight loss due to giardiasis. It is important to take a care-ful history in a patient with diarrhoea. An acute infective diarrhoea develops soon afteringestion of the offending food. The commonest infective causes of infective gastroenteritisin the UK are viruses such as rotaviruses, or the bacteria Campylobacter jejuniorSalmonellaenteritidis. Staphylococcal food poisoning occurs within a few hours and typically presentsabruptly and may be severe but short-lived. Campylobacter,SalmonellaandShigellacausemore severe symptoms than viral gastroenteritis. The incubation period for giardiasis is typ-ically about 2 weeks, but varies from 3 days to 6 weeks. Giardia lambliainfects the smallintestine and causes a watery, yellow, foul-smelling diarrhoea. Loss of appetite, nausea andweight loss are common. Symptoms usually improve after 2–3 weeks, but can persist, insome cases causing lactose intolerance.The history should try to distinguish between the small- and large-bowel origin of the diar-rhoea. Large-bowel diarrhoea tends to be maximal in the morning, pain is relieved by defae-cation, and blood and mucus may be present. By contrast diarrhoea of small-bowel origin doesnot occur at any particular time, and pain is not helped by defaecation. Typically a pale fattystool without blood or mucus occurs in small-bowel disease. Other pathogens which causesmall-bowel diarrhoea include Campylobacter, rotavirus, CryptosporidiaandStrongyloides. Ifsmall-bowel-type diarrhoea persists, other non-infective causes of malabsorption should beconsidered such as tropical sprue, coeliac disease, and chronic pancreatitis.Giardia lambliaoccurs worldwide especially in the tropics but also is endemic in Russia,and infection occurs commonly in visitors to St Petersburg. Poor sanitation and untreatedwater supplies are important factors in transmission. Outbreaks can occur in residents ofnursing homes, and giardiasis is a common cause of diarrhoea in homosexuals.Diagnosis is made by finding cysts of the parasite in stool samples. If stool samples arenegative, cysts can be found on jejunal biopsy or by sampling duodenal fluid by askingthe patient to swallow the Enterotest capsule. Treatment is with a course of metronidazole.Ideally a stool sample should be examined 6 weeks after treatment to ensure the parasitehas been eradicated. Alcohol, dairy products and spices should be avoided during therecovery period.If no infective cause had been found for this man’s diarrhoea and weight loss, further inves-tigations would have been necessary to exclude causes such as malignancy or thyrotoxicosis.
64Stool samples should be sent in a patient returning from abroad with diarrhoea.Always take an accurate history of recent foreign travel in a patient with diarrhoea.Attempt to distinguish clinically between small- and large-bowel origin of the diarrhoea.Giardiasis is a common cause of traveller’s diarrhoea CASE 24: SHORTNESS OF BREATH ON EXERTIONA 23-year-old student presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of shortnessof breath on exertion. This has developed over the past 10 days, and she is now breathlessafter walking 50 yards. About 2 weeks ago she had a flu-like illness with generalized muscleaches and fever. She feels extremely tired and has noticed palpitations in association withher breathlessness. In addition she has some discomfort in her anterior chest which isworse on inspiration. Previously she has been extremely fit with no significant past med-ical history. There is no recent history of foreign travel. She denies substance abuse.

On examination, her temperature is 37. Her pulse rate is 120/min and regular. Bloodpressure is 90/70 mmHg. Jugular venous pressure is raised at 8 cm. On auscultation thereis a gallop rhythm, with a third heart sound. 

 of her chest is unremarkable.Pressure over the sternum causes discomfort. Abdominal and neurological examination isnormal.
65
The GP sends the student to the emergency department where an electrocardiogram (ECG)and chest X-ray are performed. The ECG shows T-wave flattening globally 

 24This patient has viral myocarditis due to Coxsackie B virus. Viruses which can causemyocarditis include Coxsackie B and A, echovirus, adenovirus, influenza, varicella, polio,mumps, rabies, viral hepatitis, rubella, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), andherpes simplex virus. Myocarditis may occur during a bacteraemia or fungaemia. Rickettsiaand diptheria can cause myocarditis. In rural South America acute infection with the proto-zoanTrypanosoma cruzicauses fever, myocarditis and hepatosplenomegaly, and 10–30 yearslater this can lead to cardiac failure and conduction system defects (Chagas’ disease). Cocaineabuse can cause myocarditis, and sudden death. Profound hypocalcaemia, hypophos-phataemia, and hypomagnaesaemia can all cause myocardial depression.The clinical picture of myocarditis is non-specific, but common symptoms include myal-gia, fatigue, shortness of breath, pericardial pain and palpitations. The prodromal flu-likeillness is suggestive of this condition. The main clinical signs are those of cardiac failure.Patients usually have a marked sinus tachycardia disproportionate to the slight fever. ECGusually shows ST segment and T-wave abnormalities. There may be atrial or, more com-monly, ventricular arrhythmias or signs of conducting system defects. Chest X-ray may benormal if the myocarditis is mild, but if there is cardiac failure there will be cardiomegalyand pulmonary congestion. The differential diagnoses in this case include hypertrophiccardiomyopathy, pericarditis and myocardial ischaemia.Echocardiography should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Echocardiographic changesmay be focal affecting only the right or left ventricle, or global. There is poor contractility ofthe myocardium. Cardiac enzymes such as creatine kinase are raised. An endomyocardialbiopsy is performed as soon as possible, and will show evidence of myocardial necrosis. Pairedserum samples should be taken for antibody titres to Coxsackie B and mumps. Coxsackie viruscan be cultured from the throat, stool, blood, myocardium or pericardial fluid.Bed rest is the treatment for the period of acute viral myocarditis. Diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are used to treat cardiac failure. There is controversyover treatment with corticosteroids. Corticosteroids tend to be used in patients with a shorthistory, a positive endomyocardial biopsy, and the most severe disease. Most cases arebenign and self-limiting, and cardiac function will return to normal. However a minoritywill develop permanent cardiac damage leading to a dilated cardiomyopathy. Definitivetreatment may then involve cardiac transplantation.
66The features in favour of the diagnosis of viral myocarditis include the young age of thepatient, the preceding acute febrile illness and subsequently the raised serum antibodytitres to Coxsackie B.It is important to take a history of foreign travel and substance abuseOutcome in adults is generally good, but a proportion of patients will develop a dilatedcardiomyopathy This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 62-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of shortness of breath.Four days prior to presentation he felt unwell and complained of muscle aches and headache.He started having rigors and his wife measured his temperature as 39°C. They thought that hehad influenza. However his symptoms worsened, and by the day of presentation he was com-plaining of a dry cough and marked shortness of breath. He had also become confused, andstarted having diarrhoea. There is no significant past medical history. He is a non-smoker anddrinks 20 units of alcohol a week. Ten days prior to admission he had returned from a holidayin Spain.

On examination the patient looks unwell, dehydrated and flushed. His temperature is 39.He has central cyanosis. His pulse rate is 120/min and blood pressure 146/72 mmHg. His respiratory rate is 32/min. His trachea is central and chest expansion is symmetrical.Percussion is reduced, and auscultation reveals bilateral crackles and bronchial breathing inboth lower zones posteriorly. His abdomen is diffusely tender but there is no rigidity or guard-ing. He is disorientated in time, place and person.1) are shownbelow.
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 10.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 8.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 0.8/H11003109/LPlatelets 143/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 124 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmolCreatinine 178/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 7.0 mmol/LCalcium 1.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1.45 mmol/LC-reactive protein (CRP) 256 mg/L/H110215 mg/LArterial blood gases on airpH 7.5 kPaUrinalysis:/H11001/H11001blood;/H11001/H11001protein  

 25This man has Legionella pneumophilapneumonia. Community-acquired pneumonia ismost commonly caused by Streptococcus pneumoniaeorHaemophilus influenzae, but atyp-ical pneumonias account for about 5–15 per cent of cases. The 4-day prodromal illness istypical of Legionellapneumonia (2–10 days) compared to pneumococcal pneumonia whichtends to present abruptly with fever and shortness of breath. Legionella infection presentswith malaise, myalgia, headache and fever. Patients may develop diarrhoea and abdominalpain. As the illness progresses the patient develops a dry cough, chest pain, shortness of breathand acute confusion. Other potential complications include nephritis, endocarditis andmyocarditis. On examination, the patient is usually dehydrated, tachycardic and tachypnoeicwith widespread rhonchi and crackles. The diffuse infiltrates on chest X-ray suggest atypicalpneumonia, whereas a lobar pattern tends to occur with streptococcal pneumonia. Hypo-natraemia occurs in cases of severe pneumonia and is a poor prognostic factor. Hypocalcaemiais another distinctive biochemical abnormality in this condition. Confusion and raised ureaare markers of severity. The high CRP is consistent with a severe infection, and the lym-phopenia is a clue to the fact that this patient has an atypical pneumonia. The patient’s arte-rial blood gases showed marked hypoxia. This patient presumably acquired his infectionwhile on holiday in Spain. Legionellaoutbreaks have often been due to infected water tanksin warm climates in institutions such as hotels and hospitals.This man is acutely unwell and needs to be admitted to a high-dependency unit. He needsto receive high concentration of inspired oxygen, and also intravenous fluids to correct hisdehydration. He may require mechanical ventilation. He should be started on intravenousantibiotics. These should cover the common community-acquired pneumonias until the pre-cise microbiological diagnosis is obtained and the antibiotics can then be rationalized. Astandard combination is cefuroxime and clarithromycin. Blood cultures should be sent, andblood sent to screen for antibodies to atypical organisms such as Legionella,Mycoplasma,Chlamydia psittaciand influenza. Ten to fourteen days later a further blood sample shouldbe sent and a fourfold rise in antibody titre is evidence of current infection. A faster diag-nosis is made by testing broncheoalveolar lavage fluid, blood and urine for the presence ofLegionellaantigen.
70Legionellais one of the atypical causes of pneumonia.It should be suspected if there is an outbreak in an institution, or if a case of pneumoniafails to respond to antibiotics.Legionellapneumonia has a 2–10-day prodromal illness.Lymphopenia, evidence of nephritis, and a diffuse pattern of infiltrates on chest X-ray areother clues to the diagnosis
-----
A 46-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a 2-day history ofright-sided loin pain and macroscopic haematuria. The pain is continuous and dull incharacter. Over the past 10 years she has had previous episodes of loin pain which haveoccurred on both sides and resolved spontaneously over a few days. She has never passedany stones. She was noted to be mildly hypertensive during her three pregnancies. She hasno other significant medical history. Her father died of a subarachnoid haemorrhage, aged48 years. Her father’s brother has had a kidney transplant. She has no siblings. Her threechildren, aged 17, 14 and 10 years, are well. She works as a teacher and neither smokesnor drinks alcohol.

On examination she is afebrile. Her pulse is regular at 76/min and her blood pressure is135/105 mmHg. 

 of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is otherwiseunremarkable. On palpation of her abdomen, ballottable masses are palpable in each flank.The right-sided mass is tender to palpation. Percussion note is resonant over the masses.Neurological examination is normal. Funduscopy shows arteriovenous nipping and silver-wiring of the retinal vessels.
71
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLWhite cell count 5.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 206/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4 

 26This patient has autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease(ADPKD). She has macro-scopic haematuria, hypertension and impaired renal function. The palpable abdominalmasses in both flanks have the characteristic features of enlarged kidneys. They are ballot-table and resonant to percussion because of overlying bowel. The other principal causes forpalpable kidneys are renal cell carcinoma and massive hydronephrosis. Rest is the bestmanagement for cyst bleeding. Gross haematuria rarely lasts for more than a week.ADPKD is the most common inherited renal disease, occurring in approximately 1:600 to1:1000 individuals. Although the name ‘ADPKD’ is derived from renal manifestations ofcyst growth leading to enlarged kidneys and renal failure, this is a systemic disorder mani-fested by the presence of hepatic cysts, diverticular disease, inguinal hernias, mitral valveprolapse, intracranial aneurysms and hypertension. Flank pain is the most common symp-tom, and may be caused by cyst rupture, cyst infection or renal calculi. Macroscopichaematuria due to cyst haemorrhage occurs commonly and usually resolves spontaneously.Renal calculi occur in approximately 20 per cent of ADPKD patients (most commonly uricacid stones). Hypertension occurs early in the course of this disease affecting 60 per centof patients with normal renal function. Approximately 50 per cent of ADPKD patients willdevelop end-stage renal failure.Although it is not known if this patient’s father had renal disease, it is highly likely thathe had ADPKD and an associated ruptured berry aneurysm as the cause for his subarach-noid haemorrhage. The patient’s uncle required a renal transplant. The pattern of inher-itance in this family is consistent with an autosomal dominant trait.Ultrasound is the preferred initial screening technique as it is cheap, non-invasive and rapid.It detects cysts as small as 0. For a certain diagnosis, there should be at least three renalcysts with at least one cyst in each kidney. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic reson-ance imaging (MRI) are more sensitive techniques for detecting smaller cysts. She should be referred to a nephrologist for long-term follow-upof her renal failure, and plans should be made for renal replacement therapy. She needs tohave effective blood pressure control with diastolic pressure/H1102185 mmHg to retard the pro-gression of her renal failure. Clinical trials are starting of vasopressin receptor antagonistswhich show promise at inhibiting cyst growth.She should have MRI angiography to exclude an intracranial aneurysm. This is not advo-cated for all ADPKD patients, but is indicated for those patients with a positive family his-tory of aneurysm rupture. The patient’s children should have their blood pressure checkedand later be screened by ultrasound. By age 30 years, 90 per cent of ADPKD patients willhave cysts detectable by ultrasound.Ninety per cent of ADPKD patients have mutations in the ADPKD1gene. This gene encodesfor the protein polycystin which is a membrane glycoprotein that probably mediatescell–cell and/or cell–matrix interactions. Most remaining patients have mutations in theADPKD2gene which codes for polycystin-2, which has structural homology to polycystinand to calcium channels. ADPKD1 patients generally have an earlier age of onset of hyper-tension and development of renal failure as compared to ADPKD2 patients Renal ultrasounddemonstrating multiple cysts.Patients with ADPKD are often asymptomatic.ADPKD patients may present with loin pain or haematuria.ADPKD is the commonest familial cause of renal failure.ADPKD is the most likely cause of bilateral renal masses.Family members who may have ADPKD should be advised to have their blood pressuremeasured and a renal ultrasound This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 38-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of pains in herjoints. She has noticed these pains worsening over several months. Her joints are most stiffon waking in the mornings. The joints that are most painful are the small joints of thehands and feet. The pain is relieved by diclofenac tablets. She feels tired and has lost 4 kgin weight over 3 months. She has had no previous serious illnesses. She is married with twochildren and works as a legal secretary. She is a non-smoker and drinks alcohol only occa-sionally. Her only medication is diclofenac.

On examination she looks pale and is clinically anaemic. Her proximal interphalangealjoints and metacarpophalangeal joints are swollen and painful with effusions present. Hermetatarsophalangeal joints are also tender. Physical examination is otherwise normal.
NormalHaemoglobin 8.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 7.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 438/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 78 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 141 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 125/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 27This patient has symptoms and signs typical of early rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoidarthritis is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disorder principally affecting joints in a periph-eral symmetrical distribution. The peak incidence is between 35 and 55 years in women and40 and 60 years in men. It is a disease with a long course with exacerbations and remissions.The acute presentation may occur over the course of a day and be associated with fever and malaise. More commonly, as in this case, it presents insidiously, and this group has aworse prognosis. Rheumatoid arthritis characteristically affects proximal interphalangeal,metacarpophalangeal and wrist joints in the hands, and metatarsophalangeal joints, ankles,knees and cervical spine.Early-morning stiffness of the joints is typical of rheumatoid arthritis. As the disease pro-gresses damage to cartilage, bone and tendons leads to the characteristic deformities of thiscondition. Extra-articular features include rheumatoid nodules, vasculitis causing cutaneousnodules and digital gangrene, scleritis, pleural effusions, diffuse pulmonary fibrosis, pul-monary nodules, obliterative bronchiolitis, pericarditis and splenomegaly (Felty’s syn-drome). There is usually a normochromic normocytic anaemia and raised ESR as seen here.The degree of anaemia and ESR roughly correlate with disease activity. In this case the raisedcreatinine is probably due to the use of diclofenac. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAIDs) reduce glomerular filtration rate in all patients. Rarely they can cause an acuteinterstitial nephritis. In patients with lond-standing rheumatoid arthritis, renal infiltrationby amyloid may occur.
76!Osteoarthritis: characteristically affects the distal interphalangeal as well asproximal interphalangeal and first metacarpophalangeal joints.Rheumatoid arthritis.Systemic lupus erythematosus: usually causes a mild, flitting non-erosive arthritis.Gout: usually starts as a monoarthritis.Seronegative arthritides: ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis, Reiter’s disease. Theseusually cause an asymmetrical arthritis affecting medium and larger joints as well asthe sacroiliac and distal interphalangeal joints.Acute viral arthritis,e.g rubella: resolves completely.Differential diagnosis of an acute symmetrical polyarthritis
This patient should be referred to a rheumatologist for further investigation and manage-ment. The affected joints should be X-rayed. If there has been joint damage, the X-rays willshow subluxation, juxta-articular osteoporosis, loss of joint space and bony erosions. Blood tests should be taken for rheumatoid factor(present in rheumatoid arthritis) and anti-DNA antibodies (present in systemic lupus erythe-matosus). This patient should be given NSAIDs for analgesia and to reduce joint stiffness toallow her to continue her secretarial work. Disease-modifying drugs such as methotrexate,leflunomide, gold or penicillamine should be considered unless the patient settles easily onNSAIDs. Anti-tissue necrosis factor (TNF) antibody is effective in some severe cases of rheuma-toid arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis tends to spare the distal interphalangeal joints.Systemic symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis may precede the joint symptoms.Anaemia and ESR correlate with disease activity.NSAIDs may adversely affect renal function.1X-ray of the foot This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 25-year-old woman is complaining of chest pain. This had been present for 2 years on andoff. The pain settled for a period of 6 months but it has returned over the last 10 months. Thepain is usually on the left side of the chest, radiating to the left axilla. She describes it as atight or gripping pain which lasts for anything from 5 to 30 min at a time. It can come onat any time, and is often related to exercise but it has occurred at rest on some occasions,particularly in the evenings. The pain is usually associated with shortness of breath. It makesher stop whatever she is doing and she often feels faint or dizzy with the pain. Occasionallypalpitations come on after the start of the pain. Detailed questioning about the palpitationsindicates that they are a sensation of a strong but steady heart beat.In her previous medical history she had her appendix removed at the age of 15 years. Atthe age of 30 years she was investigated for an irregular bowel habit and abdominal painbut no specific diagnosis was arrived at. These symptoms still trouble her. She has sea-sonal rhinitis. Two years ago she visited a chemist and had her cholesterol level measured;the result was 4. In her family history her grandfather died of a myocardialinfarction, a year previously, aged 77 years. Several members of her family have hay feveror asthma. She works as a medical secretary. She is married and has no children.

On examination, she has a blood pressure of 102/65 mmHg and pulse of 78/min which is reg-ular. The heart sounds are normal. There is some tenderness on the left side of the chest, tothe left of the sternum and in the left submammary area. The respiratory rate is 22/min. Noabnormalities were found on examination of the lungs. She is tender in the left iliac fossa.She asked to be referred for a coronary arteriogram to rule out significant coronaryartery disease.1Electrocardiogram 

 28The ECG shown is normal. The pain does not have the characteristics of ischaemic heartdisease. On the basis of the information given here it would be reasonable to explore heranxieties and to reassure the patient that this is very unlikely to represent coronary arterydisease and to assess subsequently the effects of that reassurance. It may well be that sheis anxious about the death of her grandfather from ischaemic heart disease. He may havehad symptoms before his death which were related to her anxieties. From a risk point ofview her grandfather’s death at the age of 77 with no other affected relatives is not a rele-vant risk factor. She has expressed anxiety already by having the cholesterol measured(and found to be normal).She has a history which is suspicious of irritable bowel syndrome with persistent pain,irregular bowel habit and normal investigations. Ischaemic chest pain is usually centraland generally reproducible with the same stimuli. The associated shortness of breath mayreflect overventilation coming on with the pain and giving her dizziness and palpitations.The characteristics of the pain and associated shortness of breath should be explored fur-ther. Asthma can sometimes be described as tightness or pain in the chest, and she has sea-sonal rhinitis and a family history of asthma. Gastrointestinal causes of pain such as refluxoesophagitis are unlikely in view of the site and relationship on occasions to exercise. Thelength of the history excludes other causes of acute chest pain such as pericarditis.The problem of embarking on tests is that there is no simple screening test which candefinitively rule out significant coronary artery disease. Too many investigations mayreinforce her belief in her illness and false-positive findings do occur and may exacerbateher anxieties. However, if the patient could not be simply reassured it might be appropri-ate to proceed with an exercise stress test or a thallium scan to look for areas of reversibleischaemia on exercise or other stress. A coronary arteriogram would not be appropriatewithout other information to indicate a higher degree of risk of coronary artery disease.
80Ischaemic heart disease characteristically causes central rather than left-sided chest pain.The resting ECG may show signs of ischaemia or previous infarction but is not a verysensitive test for ischaemic heart disease
-----
A 30-year-old woman is brought up to the emergency department at 2 pm by her hus-band. He is worried that she has taken some tablets in an attempt to harm herself. She hasa history suggestive of depression since the birth of her son 3 months earlier. She has beenhaving some counselling since that time but has not been on any medication. The previ-ous evening about 10 pm she told her husband that she was going to take some pills andlocked herself in the bathroom. Two hours later he persuaded her to come out and she saidthat she had not taken anything. They went to bed but he has brought her up now becauseshe has complained of a little nausea and he is worried that she might have taken somethingwhen she was in the bathroom. The only tablets in the house were aspirin, paracetamol andtemazepam which he takes occasionally for insomnia.She complains of a little nausea although she has not vomited. She has had a little abdom-inal discomfort. There is no relevant previous medical or family history of note. Sheworked as a social worker until 30 weeks of the pregnancy.

On examination she is mentally alert. She says that she feels sad. Her pulse is 76/min,blood pressure is 124/78 mmHg and respiratory rate is 16/min. There is some mild abdom-inal tenderness in the upper abdomen but nothing else abnormal to find.
81
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 230/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LProthrombin time 18 s 10–14 sSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 81/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LAlkaline phosphatase 88 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase (AAT) 37 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 32 IU/L 11–51 IU/LGlucose 5 

 29It is not evident from the history that the patient herself has been asked about any tablets orother agents she has taken. This would be an important area to be sure of. Of the three agentsmentioned, the only one likely to be relevant is paracetamol. Aspirin and temazepam wouldbe likely to produce more symptoms in less than 14 h if they have been taken in significantquantity. However, the salicylate level should certainly be measured; in this case it was notraised. In the absence of drowsiness at this time, it is not necessary to consider temazepamany further.Paracetamol overdosecauses hepatic and renal damage, and can lead to death from acuteliver failure. The severity of paracetamol poisoning is dose related with a dose of 15 gbeing serious in most patients. Patients with pre-existing liver disease and those with ahigh alcohol intake may be susceptible to smaller overdoses.The only significant abnormality on the blood tests is a slightly high prothrombin time andminimally raised alanine aminotransferase (AAT). The prothrombin time increase (expressedalternatively as the international normalized ratio or INR) is a signal that a paracetamol over-dose is likely. It is often the first test to become abnormal when there is liver damage fromparacetamol overdose. If the INR is abnormal at 24 h, then a significant problem is very likely.There are few symptoms in the first 24 h except perhaps nausea, vomiting and abdominal dis-comfort. This may be associated with tenderness over the liver. The liver function tests usu-ally become abnormal after the first 24 h. Maximum liver damage, as assessed by raised liverenzymes and INR occurs at days 3–4 after overdose. Acute liver failure may develop betweendays 3 and 5, and renal failure occurs in about 25 per cent of patients with severe hepaticdamage. Rarely, renal failure can occur without serious liver damage.The paracetamol level should be measured urgently; it was found to be high. The evidenceof early liver damage from the INR would in itself suggest that treatment with acetylcys-teine would be appropriate. The earlier this is used the better but it is certainly still worth-while 16 h after the ingestion. In this case a level of paracetamol of 64 mg/L confirmedthat treatment was appropriate and that the risk of severe liver damage was high. Furtheradvice can always be obtained by ringing one of the national poisons information ser-vices. The electrolyte, renal and liver function tests and the clotting studies should bemonitored carefully over the first few days, and referral to a liver unit considered if thereis marked liver dysfunction. Patients with fulminant hepatic failure are considered forurgent liver transplantation.The other areas that need to be addressed in this case are the mental state and the safetyand care of the son and any other children. This is a serious drug overdose. She should beseen by a psychiatrist or other appropriately trained health worker. The question of anypossible risk to the baby should be evaluated before she returns home.
82Intravenous acetylcysteine and oral methionine are effective treatments for paracetamoloverdose if started early enough.Paracetamol levels can be used to predict problems and guide treatment if the timesince overdose is known.Paracetamol overdose should be suspected in any patient admitted with deranged liverfunction tests and clotting, if no obvious alternative cause is apparent
-----
A 23-year-old actress presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining that she hasnot had a menstrual period for 5 months. She started having periods aged 13 years andpreviously they had been regular. On direct questioning she states that she has lost 8 kg inweight over the past year although she says her appetite is good. She has had no seriousmedical illnesses. Currently she is out of work. She split up from her boyfriend 1 year ago.She drinks 10 units of alcohol per week and is a non-smoker. She is taking no regularmedication.

She has lost muscle mass especially on her limbs and buttocks.7 m (5 ft 9 in) tall andweighs only 41 kg. She has excessive hair growth over her cheeks, neck and forearms. Herpulse rate is 52/min regular, blood pressure 96/60 mmHg. 

 is otherwise normal.
83
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 84 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 365/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 2.0 mmol/LChloride 90 mmol/L 95–105 mmol/LBicarbonate 33 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 43/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5 

 30This picture of loss of menstruation (secondary amenorrhoea), weight loss (to a body massindex (BMI) of 14.0) and hypokalaemic, hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis fits well with adiagnosis of anorexia nervosa. This is a disorder usually of teenagers or young adults char-acterized by severe weight loss, a disorder of body image (the patient perceiving themself asbeing fat despite being objectively thin) and amenorrhoea (or, in men loss of libido orpotency). It is commoner in women than men. Often sufferers from this condition work in aprofession where personal image is very important, e. models, actresses, ballet dancers,and there may be a trigger of an emotional upset such as break-up of a relationship or fail-ure in important examinations. Patients may abuse purgatives or diuretics or cause self-induced vomiting. Some patients exhibit the bulimic behaviour of recurrent bouts ofovereating and self-induced vomiting. Patients often deny that they are ill or that they needmedical attention. There is marked wasting with obvious bony prominences. The skin is drywith growth of lanugo hair over the neck, cheeks and limbs as in this woman. There is usu-ally a sinus bradycardia and hypotension. Severe physical complications include proximalmyopathy, cardiomyopathy and peripheral neuropathy.
84Hypothalmic/pituitary pathology, e. hypopituitarism, hyperprolactinaemia.Gonadal failure, e. autoimmune ovarian failure, polycystic ovaries.Adrenal disease, e. Cushing’s disease.Thyroid disorders, e. both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.Severe chronic illnesses, e. cancer, chronic renal failure.Major causes of secondary amenorrhoea!
A number of interrelated mechanisms cause the metabolic alkalosis in this patient. The vom-iting causes a net loss of hydrogen and chloride ions, causing alkalosis and hypochloraemia.The loss of fluid by vomiting leads to a contracted plasma volume with consequent second-ary hyperaldosteronism to conserve sodium and water, but with renal loss of potassium, dueto its secretion in preference to sodium and the fact that fewer hydrogen ions are availablefor secretion by the renal tubules. These events combine to give the typical picture of analkalosis with low chloride and raised bicarbonate in the blood, and urine which containsexcess potassium and very little chloride. Measurement of 24-h urinary chloride excretion ishelpful. A low urinary chloride excretion (/H1102110 mmol/day) implies vomiting, whereas highervalues suggest diuretic abuse.This patient should be referred to a unit with a special interest in eating disorders. Otherserious physical illnesses should be excluded with the appropriate investigations. Plasmalevels of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and oestrogens willbe low. Often such patients are admitted for several weeks in an attempt to make them gainweight. This involves a high-calorie diet with support from the medical and nursing team.Supportive psychotherapy tackles the patient’s disordered perception of their body image.Anorexia nervosa is a common cause of amenorrhoea in young women.Hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis is the characteristic metabolic abnormality.Anorexia nervosa may be associated with abuse of diuretics or purgatives This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 75-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of severeback pain. This developed suddenly a week previously after carrying a heavy suitcase atthe airport. The pain is persistent and in her lower back. She has had increasing problemswith back pain over the past 10 years, and her family have commented on how stoopedher posture has become. Her height has reduced by 10 cm over this period. Her past med-ical history is notable for severe chronic asthma. She takes courses of oral corticosteroids,and use steroid inhalers on a regular basis. She fell 2 years ago and sustained a Colles’fracture to her left wrist. She developed the menopause at age 42 years. She smokes 30cigarettes a day, and drinks four bottles of wine a week.

She has a thoracic kyphosis. She is tender over the L4 vertebra. She has a moon-face,abdominal striae and a number of bruises on her arms and thighs. She is not anaemic, andexamination is otherwise unremarkable.
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 105 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 358/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 8 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 143 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 102/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 X-ray of the lumbar spine 

 31This woman has vertebral collapse due to osteoporosis. The symptoms of osteoporosisare deformity, localized pain and fracture. The loss of height is typical, and is usuallynoted more by others than the patient. The back pain is due to collapse of the vertebrae.This can occur spontaneously or in association with a recognized stress such as carryinga heavy load. 

 confirms loss of trunk height, thoracic kyphosis and proxim-ity of the ribs to the iliac crest.
88!Multiple myelomaMetastatic carcinoma, particularly from the prostate, breast, bronchus, thyroid andkidneyOsteomalaciaHyperparathyroidismSteroid therapy or Cushing’s syndromeThe differential diagnoses of osteoporosis
This patient has several risk factors for osteoporosis. Firstly she is aged 75 years, and age-ing is associated with bone loss. Secondly she has been postmenopausal for over 30 years.Premenopausal ovarian production of oestrogens help to preserve bone mass. Thirdly shehas been on oral and inhaled corticosteroids for her asthma for years. Finally, excess alco-hol intake may also be a factor. Her red cells are macrocytic, which is consistent with heavyalcohol intake. Alcohol can lead to an increased incidence of falls and fractures. She hasno clinical evidence of thyrotoxicosis or hypopituitarism which can cause osteoporosis.This woman should have blood tests to exclude myeloma, cancer and metabolic bone dis-ease. Patients with myeloma are anaemic with a raised ESR and a monoclonal paraproteinon serum protein electrophoresis. In contrast to metabolic bone diseases biochemical meas-urements (serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase and parathormone (PTH)) in osteoporosisare normal. She should have plain X-rays of her spine. Collapse of the vertebral body willmanifest as irregular anterior wedging affecting some vertebrae and not others (L1 and L4).A dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan can be performed to assess the severityof the osteoporosis, but treatment is indicated anyway with a fracture at this age.She should have her dose of corticosteroids reduced to the minimum required to control herasthmatic symptoms, using the inhaled routes as far as possible. She should be started oncalcium and vitamin D supplements and a bisphosphonate to try to reduce her bone loss.Oestrogen-based hormone replacement therapy is only used for symptoms associated withthe menopause because of the increased incidence of thromboembolism and endometrialcarcinoma. Newer treatments for osteoporosis include strontium and parathyroid hormone.Osteoporosis is common in the elderly.Bone loss is more rapid in women than men.DEXA scan is the method of choice of screening for osteoporosis.There are increasingly effective treatments available for the treatment of osteoporosis
-----
A 31-year-old woman has a 6-year history of abdominal pain and bloating. She has hadan irregular bowel habit with periods of increased bowel actions up to four times a dayand periods of constipation. Opening her bowels tends to relieve the pain which has beenpresent in both iliac fossae at different times. She had similar problems around the age of17 years which led to time off school. She thinks that her pains are made worse after eat-ing citrus fruits and after some vegetables and wheat. She has tried to exclude these fromher diet with some temporary relief but overall there has been no change in the symptomsover the 6 years. One year previously she was seen in a gastroenterology clinic and had asigmoidoscopy which was normal. She found the procedure very uncomfortable anddeveloped similar symptoms of abdominal pain during the procedure. She is anxiousabout the continuing pain but is not keen to have a further endoscopy.She has a history of occasional episodes of headache which have been diagnosed asmigraine and has irregular periods with troublesome period pains but no other relevantmedical history. She is a non-smoker who does not drink alcohol. Her paternal grandmotherdied of carcinoma of the colon aged 64 years. Her parents are alive and well. She works asa secretary.



 of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is normal. She has a palpable,rather tender colon in the left iliac fossa.
89
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 84 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 5.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 244/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 8 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 89/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 32The pattern of the pain, the absence of physical signs, normal investigations and repro-duction of the pain during sigmoidoscopy all make it likely that this isirritable bowelsyndrome(IBS). This is a very common condition accounting for a large number of refer-rals to gastroenterology clinics. IBS is often episodic, with variable periods of relapse andremission. Periods of frequent defaecation alternate with periods of relative constipation.Relapses are often associated with periods of stress. In IBS it is common to have a historyof other conditions such as migraine and menstrual irregularity. Under the age of 40 yearswith a history of 6 years of similar problems, it would be reasonable to accept the diag-nosis and reassure the patient. However, the family history of carcinoma of the colonraises the possibility of a condition such as familial polyposis coli. The family history, thecircumstances of the grandmother’s death and the patient’s feelings about this should beexplored further. Anxiety about the family history might contribute to the patient’s ownsymptoms or her presentation at this time. If there are living family members with poly-posis coli, DNA probing may be used to identify family members at high risk. If any doubtremains in this woman it would be sensible to proceed to a barium enema or a colonoscopyto rule out any significant problems.The diagnosis of IBS relies on the exclusion of other significant conditions such as inflam-matory bowel disease, diverticular disease or large-bowel malignancy. In patients underthe age of 40 years it is usually reasonable to do this on the basis of the history, exam-ination and a normal full blood count and ESR. In older patients, sigmoidoscopy and bar-ium enema or colonoscopy should be performed. A plan of investigation and managementshould be clearly established. The symptoms tend to be persistent and are not helped byrepeated normal investigations looking for an underlying cause. Symptoms may be helpedby antispasmodic drugs or tricyclic antidepressants. Some patients will benefit from theconsumption of a high-fibre diet.
90Irritable bowel syndrome is a common disorder and difficult to treat.Explanation of the condition to the patient is an important part of the management.Sigmoidoscopy with air insufflation often reproduces the symptoms of IBS
-----
A 28-year-old black South African theatre nurse in London is admitted to the emergencydepartment complaining of headaches and confusion. Her headaches have developed overthe past 3 weeks and have become progressively more severe. The headaches are now per-sistent and diffuse. Her friend who accompanies her says that she has lost 10 kg in weightover 6 months and has recently become increasingly confused. Her speech is slurred.While in the emergency department she has a generalized tonic–clonic convulsion.

She is thin and weighs 55 kg. Her temperature is 38. There is oral candidiasis. There isno lymphadenopathy. 

 of her cardiovascular, respiratory and gastrointestinalsystems is normal. Neurological examination prior to her fit showed her to be disorien-tated in time, place and person. There were no focal neurological signs. Funduscopyshows bilateral papilloedema.
91
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLWhite cell count 12.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 365/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 126 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 73/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5.1Computed tomography scan ofthe brain 

 33This woman has cerebral toxoplasmosissecondary to HIV infection. This condition iscaused by the protozoan Toxoplasma gondiiwhich primarily infects cats but can also becarried by any warm blooded animal. In the West, 30–80 per cent of adults have beeninfected by ingesting food or water contaminated by cat faeces, or by eating raw meatfrom sheep or pigs which contain Toxoplasmacysts. After ingestion by humans the organ-ism divides rapidly within macrophages and spreads to muscles and brain. The immunesystem rapidly controls the infection, and the cysts remain dormant. The primary infec-tion is generally asymptomatic, but can cause an acute mononucleosis-type illness withgeneralized lympadenopathy and rash. It may leave scars in the choroid and retina andsmall inflammatory lesions in the brain. If the host then becomes immunocompromisedthe organism starts proliferating causing toxoplasmosis. This is an AIDS-defining illness,but is relatively rare in solid organ transplant recipients. Cerebral toxoplasmosis usuallypresents with a subacute illness comprising fever, headache, confusion, fits, cognitive dis-turbance, focal neurological signs including hemiparesis, ataxia, cranial nerve lesions,visual field defects and sensory loss. Movement disorders are common due to involvementof the basal ganglia. CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will usually show multiplebilateral ring-enhancing lesions predominantly located near the grey–white matter junc-tion, basal ganglia, brainstem and cerebellum. The clinical and radiological differentialdiagnoses include lymphoma, tuberculosis and secondary tumours. Anti-toxoplasma anti-body titres should be measured, but are not always positive.The other clues in this case to the diagnosis of HIV infection include the patient’s country oforigin, the weight loss and oral candidiasis. The headaches and papilloedema are caused byraised intracranial pressure from the multiple space-occupying lesions. The hyponatraemiais due to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion (SIADH) con-sequent to the raised intracranial pressure.This woman should be started on anticonvulsants to prevent further seizures. Treatment isstarted with high-dose sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine together with folinic acid to pre-vent myelosuppression. There should be a rapid clinical and radiological improvement. Incases that have not responded within 3 weeks, a biopsy of one of the lesions should beconsidered. Cerebral toxoplamosis is uniformally fatal if untreated, and even after treat-ment neurological sequelae are common.The patient should be counselled about HIV infection and consented for an HIV test. HerHIV viral load and CD4 count should be measured, and antiretroviral drugs started. Sheshould be advised to contact her previous sexual partners so that they can be tested andstarted on antiretroviral therapy. She should also tell her occupational health departmentso that the appropriate advice can be taken about contacting, testing and reassuringpatients. The risk of HIV transmission from a healthcare worker to a patient is very small.
92Toxoplasmosis is the most common opportunistic infection of the central nervous systemin patients with AIDS.Patients can present with headache, confusion, fits and focal neurological deficits.The clinical and radiological response to treatment is usually rapid
-----
A 23-year-old African-Caribbean woman is admitted to the emergency department hav-ing had two tonic–clonic generalized seizures which were witnessed by her mother. Hermother says that her daughter has been behaving increasingly strangely, and has beenhearing voices talking about her. Recently, she has complained of severe headaches. Shehas lost weight and has noticed that her hair has been falling out. She has also complainedof night sweats and flitting joint pains affecting mainly the small joints of her hands andfeet. She works as a bank clerk. She smokes 5–10 cigarettes per day and consumes about10 units of alcohol per week. She is taking no regular medication. She has no significantmedical or psychiatric history.

She is drowsy but responsive to pain. There is no neck stiffness. Her scalp hair is thin andpatchy. Her temperature is 38. She has numerous small palpable lymph nodes. Herpulse rate is 104/min regular, blood pressure 164/102 mmHg. 

 of her cardio-vascular, respiratory and abdominal systems is otherwise normal. Neurological examin-ation reveals no focal abnormality and no papilloedema.
93
NormalHaemoglobin 7.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 2.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 72/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 90 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 176/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LLumbar punctureLeucocytes 150/mL/H110215/mLCerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein 1.4 g/LCSF glucose 4 

 34This patient has a number of important symptoms, particularly the generalized seizures,auditory hallucinations, fever, arthralgia and alopecia. Investigations show low haemo-globin, white cells and platelets with impaired renal function and blood, protein and cellsin the urine. The CSF contains white cells and a high protein content but no organisms.This is a multisystem disease and the symptoms and investigations are explained best by a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus(SLE). SLE is an autoimmune conditionwhich is about nine times more common in women than men, and is especially commonin African-Caribbean and Asian individuals. It varies in severity from a mild illness caus-ing a rash or joint pains, to a life-threatening multisystem illness. In the brain, SLE causesa small-vessel vasculitis and can present with depression, a schizophrenia-like psychosis,fits, chorea and focal cerebral/spinal cord infarction. Lumbar puncture usually shows araisedleucocyte count and protein level. A Coombs’-positive haemolytic anaemia may occur.Leucopenia and thrombocytopenia are common. Glomerulonephritis is another commonmanifestation of lupus and may present with microscopic haematuria/proteinuria, nephroticsyndrome or renal failure. Arthritis commonly affects the proximal interphalangeal andmetacarpophalangeal joints and wrists, usually as arthralgia without any deformity.
94!Meningitis/encephalitis‘Recreational’ drug abuse, e. cocaineCerebral tumourAcute alcohol withdrawal: delirium tremensHypertensive encephalopathyDifferential diagnosis of the combination of headaches/psychiatric features/fitsThis patient needs urgent antihypertensive treatment to lower her blood pressure, andanticonvulsant treatment. Blood should be sent for anti-DNA antibodies (present in SLE)and complement C3 and C4 levels (depressed in SLE). A renal biopsy will provide histo-logical evidence of the severity of the lupus nephritis. As soon as active infection has beenexcluded, treatment should be started with intravenous steroids and cytotoxic agents suchas cyclophosphamide. Plasma exchange may be added in severe or resistant cases.SLE is particularly common in young African-Caribbean women.SLE may present with predominantly neurological or psychiatric features.A low white cell count or low platelet numbers are often a suggestive feature of SLE
-----
A 38-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) complaining of a painlesslump on the right side of his neck. This has been present for about 2 months and seems tobe enlarging. He has had no recent throat infections. He has been feeling generally unwelland has lost about 5 kg in weight. The patient has also developed drenching night sweats.Simultaneously he has noticed severe generalized itching. He has had no significant pastmedical history. He is an accountant, and married with three children. He neither smokesnor drinks alcohol and is not taking any regular medication.

His temperature is 37. There is a smooth, firm 3/H110034c m  p a l p a b l e  m a s s  i n  t h e  r i g h t  s u p r a -clavicularfossa. There are also lymph nodes 1–2 cm in diameter, palpable in both axillaeand inguinal areas. His oropharynx appears normal. There are multiple excoriations of hisskin. His pulse rate is 100/min regular and blood pressure 112/66 mmHg. 

 ofhis cardiovascular and respiratory systems is normal. On abdominal examination, there isa mass palpable 3 cm below the left costal margin. The mass is dull to percussion and it isimpossible to palpate its upper edge. Neurological examination is normal.
95
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 12.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 321/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate 74 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 114/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 35Transient small nodes in the neck or groin are common benign findings. However, a 3/H110034c mmass of nodes for 2 months is undoubtedly abnormal. Persistent lymphadenopathy and con-stitutional symptoms suggest a likely diagnosis of lymphomaor chronic leukaemia.Sarcoidosis and tuberculosis are possible but less likely diagnoses. Lymph nodes are normallybarely palpable, if at all. The character of enlarged lymph nodes is very important. In acuteinfections the nodes are tender and the overlying skin may be red. Carcinomatous nodes areusually very hard, fixed and irregular. The nodes of chronic leukaemias and lymphomas arenon-tender, firm and rubbery. The distribution of enlarged lymph nodes may be diagnostic.Repeated minor trauma and infection may cause enlargement of the locally draining lymphnodes. Enlargement of the left supraclavicular nodes may be due to metastatic spread frombronchial and nasopharyngeal carcinomas or from gastric carcinomas (Virchow’s node).However, when there is generalized lymphadenopathy with or without splenomegaly, a sys-temic illness is most likely. The typical systemic symptoms of lymphoma are malaise, fever,night sweats, pruritus, weight loss, anorexia and fatigue. Fever indicates extensive disease,and may be associated with night sweats. Severe skin itching is a feature of some cases oflymphoma and other myeloproliferative illnesses.The incidence of lymphoma is greatly increased in patients who are immunosuppressed,such as organ transplant recipients and patients with HIV infection.
96!Infections: infectious mononucleosis or ‘glandular fever’ (caused by Epstein–Barrvirus infection), toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus infection, acute HIV infection,tuberculosis, brucellosis and syphilis.Inflammatory conditions: systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis andsarcoidosis.Lymphomas or chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.Major differential diagnosis of generalized lymphadenopathy
The most likely clinical diagnosis in this man is lymphoma. The patient should be referred toa local haemato-oncology unit. He should have a lymph-node biopsy to reach a histologicaldiagnosis, and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and bone marrowto stage the disease. CT scanning is a non-invasive and effective method of imaging retroperi-toneal, iliac and mesenteric nodes.1), and is useful for assessing responseto treatment. The patient will require treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy.Radiotherapy alone is reserved for patients with limited disease, but this patient has wide-spread disease. He should be given allopurinol prior to starting chemotherapy, to preventmassive release of uric acid as a consequence of tumour lysis, which can cause acute renalfailure CT–PET imageshowing increased activityin enlarged lymph nodes,particularly in the right sideof the neck.The character and distribution of abnormal lymph nodes is helpful in reaching a diagnosis.Lymphadenopathy affecting two or more separate groups of nodes suggests lymphomaor a systemic infection.CT–PET scanning allows accurate staging of disease and assessment of maintenance ofremission in response to treatment
-----
A 74-year-old woman has a 10-year history of intermittent lower abdominal pain. Thepain has been colicky in nature and is associated with a feeling of distension in the leftiliac fossa. It is generally relieved by passing flatus or faeces. She tends to be constipatedand passes small pieces of faeces. Four years previously she passed some blood with herbowel motion and had a barium enema performed. Over the lastweek her pain has worsened and now she has continuous pain in the left iliac fossa andfeels generally unwell. Her appetite has been poor over this same time. She has not hadher bowels open over the last 2 days. In her previous medical history she had a hysterec-tomy for fibroids 20 years ago. There is a family history of ischaemic heart disease anddiabetes mellitus. She lives alone and does her own cooking and shopping.
98

She has a temperature of 38.5°C and is tender with a vague impression of a mass in theleft iliac fossa. There is no guarding or rebound tenderness and the bowel sounds are nor-mal. Her pulse is 84/min and blood pressure is 154/88 mmHg. There are no abnormalitiesto find in the respiratory system  g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 15.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 235/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LC-reactive protein (CRP) 56 mg/L/H110215 mg/L 

 36This woman has diverticulitis. Colonic diverticula are small outpouchings which are mostcommonly found in the left colon. They are very common in the elderly Western popula-tion probably due to a deficiency in dietary fibre. Symptomatic diverticular disease hasmany of the features of irritable bowel syndrome. Inflammation in a diverticulum istermed diverticulitis. In severe cases, perforation, paracolic abscess formation or septi-caemia may develop. Other potential complications include bowel obstruction. formationof a fistula into rectum or vagina, and haemorrhage.The barium enema from 4 years ago shows evidence of diverticular disease with outpouch-ings of the mucosa in the sigmoid colon. This would be consistent with the long-standinghistory of abdominal pain of colonic type and tendency to constipation. The recent problemswith increased pain, tenderness, fever, raised white cell count and CRP and a mass in the leftiliac fossa would be compatible with an acute exacerbation of her diverticular disease. In hercase there is no evidence of peritonitis which would signal a possible perforation of one ofthe diverticula.The differential diagnosis, with the suggestion of a mass and change in bowel habit, wouldbe carcinoma of the colon and Crohn’s disease. In the absence of evidence of perforationwith leak of bowel contents into the peritoneum (no peritonitis) or obstruction (normalbowel sounds, no general distension), treatment should be based on the presumptive diag-nosis of diverticulitis. A colonoscopy should be performed at a later date to exclude thepossibility of a colonic neoplasm.A CT scan of the abdomen will delineate the mass and suggest whether there is evidenceof local abscess formation. Treatment should include broad-spectrum antibiotics, intra-venous fluids and rest. Further investigations are indicated, including electrolytes, ureaand creatinine, glucose, liver function tests and blood cultures. Repeated severe episodes,bleeding or obstruction may necessitate surgery.
100Diverticular disease is a common finding in the elderly Western population and may beasymptomatic or cause irritable bowel syndrome-type symptoms.Diverticular disease is a common condition; its presence can distract the unwary doctorfrom pursuing a co-incident condition.Diverticulitis needs to be treated with antibiotics to reduce the chance of complicationssuch as perforation or fistula formation occurring
-----
A 36-year-old woman is referred by her general practitioner (GP) to a hypertension clinic.She was noted to be hypertensive when she joined the practice 2 years previously. Herblood pressure has been difficult to control and she is currently taking four agents (ben-drofluazide, atenolol, amlodipine and doxazosin). She had normal blood pressure and nopre-eclampsia during her only pregnancy 9 years previously. There is no family history of premature hypertension. She smokes 20 cigarettes a day and drinks less than 10 units aweek. She is not on the oral contraceptive pill. She works part time as a teaching assistant.

She is not overweight and looks well. Her pulse rate is 68/minute and blood pressure180/102 mmHg. There is no radiofemoral delay. There are no café-au-lait spots or neuro-fibromas. 

 of the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal systems is nor-mal. The fundi show no significant changes of hypertension.
101
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 266/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.1Renal angiogram 

 37This woman has hypertension due to renovascular disease. The vast majority of cases of hypertension are due to essential hypertension. Risk factors for essential hypertensioninclude a family history of hypertension, obesity and lack of exercise. She does not haveparoxysmal symptoms of sweating, palpitations and anxiety to suggest a phaeochromocy-toma. There are no clinical features to suggest coarctation of the aorta (radiofemoral delay)or neurofibromatosis (café-au-lait spots/neurofibromas). Serum potassium is not low mak-ing Conn’s syndrome or Cushing’s syndrome unlikely. The principal abnormality is themodestly raised creatinine suggesting mildly impaired renal function. The absence ofhaematuria and proteinuria excludes glomerulonephritis. Therefore renovascular diseaseneeds to be considered. The absence of a renal bruit does not exclude the possibility of reno-vasculardisease. The renal angiogram shows bilateral fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD).The commonest cause of renovascular disease is atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis (ARAS).This is common in elderly patients with evidence of generalized atherosclerosis (peripheralvascular disease and coronary artery disease). Ultrasound will often show small kidneys, andrenal impairment is common. ARAS is a common cause of end-stage renal failure in the elderly.At this woman’s age atherosclerotic renovascular disease is very unlikely. FMD is the secondmost common cause of renovascular disease. The commonest form is medial fibroplasia withthinning of the intima and media leading to formation of aneurysms alternating withstenoses, leading to the classic ‘string of beads’ appearances on angiography. It predomi-nantly affects young and middle-aged women with a peak incidence in the fourth decade oflife. Cigarette smoking is a risk factor. FMD usually presents with hypertension, but canrarely present with ‘flash’ pulmonary oedema. FMD can also affect the carotid arteries caus-ing a variety of neurological symptoms.Treatment is with percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty. Unlike atheromatous reno-vasculardisease, the hypertension in FMD cases is often cured leading to complete cessa-tion of blood pressure medication. Restenosis is rare.
102FMD is an important cause of hypertension in young and middle-aged women.Renal artery angioplasty will improve or even cure hypertension in many patients withFMD.FMD is a very rare cause of end-stage renal failure
-----
A 34-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of a rash.Over the past 2 weeks she has developed multiple tender red swellings on her shins andforearms. The older swellings are darker in colour and seem to be healing from the centre.She feels generally unwell and tired and also has pains in her wrists and ankles. She hasnot had a recent sore throat. Over the past 2 years she has had recurrent aphthous ulcersin her mouth. She has had no genital ulceration but she has been troubled by intermittentabdominal pain and diarrhoea. She works as a waitress and is unmarried. She smokesabout 15 cigarettes per day and drinks alcohol only occasionally. She has had no otherprevious medical illnesses and there is no relevant family history that she can recall.

She is thin but looks well. There are no aphthous ulcers to see at the time of the exam-ination. Her joints are not inflamed and the range of movement is not restricted orpainful. Examining the skin there are multiple tender lesions on the shins and forearms.The lesions are raised and vary from 1 to 3 cm in diameter. The fresher lesions are red andthe older ones look like bruises. Physical examination is otherwise normal.
103
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 15.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 198/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 98 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 86/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5 

 38This patient has erythema nodosum, in this case secondary to previously undiagnosedCrohn’s disease. Erythema nodosum is due to inflammation of the small blood vessels inthe deep dermis. Characteristically it affects the shins, but it may also affect the thighs andforearms. The number and size of the lesions is variable. Lesions tend to heal from thecentre and spread peripherally. The rash is often preceded by systemic symptoms – fever,malaise and arthralgia. It usually resolves over 3–4 weeks, but persistence or recurrencesuggests an underlying disease.
104!Streptococcal infection Lymphoma/leukaemiaTuberculosis SarcoidosisLeprosy Pregnancy/oral contraceptiveGlandular fever Reaction to sulphonamidesHistoplasmosis Ulcerative colitisCoccidioidomycosis Crohn’s diseaseDiseases linked to erythema nodosum
The history of mouth ulcers, abdominal pain and diarrhoea strongly suggests that thiswoman has Crohn’s disease. She should therefore be referred to a gastroenterologist forinvestigations which should include a small-bowel enema and colonoscopy with biopsies.Treatment of her underlying disease with steroids should cause the erythema nodosum toresolve. With no serious underlying condition, erythema nodosum usually settles withnon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.Patients presenting with erythema nodosum should be investigated for an underlyingdisease.Erythema nodosum is most often seen on the shins but can affect the extensor surface ofthe forearms or thighs
-----
An 83-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) having developed multipleblisters on his skin and mouth. The blisters have appeared over 2 days. They tend to burstrapidly to leave a large red sore lesion. The patient has lost about 5 kg in weight over thepast 3 months and has a poor appetite. He feels generally unwell. He has also noticed thathis bowel habit has become erratic and has noticed some blood in his bowel motions. Hehas previously been fit and had no significant past medical illnesses. He lives alone andneither smokes nor drinks alcohol. He is taking no regular prescribed medication and hasnot bought any medication from a pharmacy or health food outlet except some multivit-amin tablets since he felt unwell.

He looks emaciated and unwell. There are blisters spread all over his skin and sores withinhis mouth. Most of the blisters appear to have burst. His pulse rate is 102/min, irregularlyirregular and blood pressure 160/78 mmHg. 

 of his heart and respiratory sys-tem is otherwise normal. There is a 6 cm hard nodular liver edge palpable, and also a hardmobile mass present in the left iliac fossa. On rectal examination there is some bright redblood mixed with faecal material on the glove.
105
NormalHaemoglobin 9.7 g/dLWhite cell count 6.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 236/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 72 fL 80–99 fLSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 94/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LAlbumin 32 g/L 35–50 g/LGlucose 4 

 39This patient has pemphigus vulgaris. This is a blistering disease where the level of theblister is within the epidermis. The superficial nature of the blister means that the blistersare prone to burst leaving a glistening red base which bleeds easily. The epidermis at theedge of the blister is easily dislodged by sliding pressure (Nikolsky sign). Erosions in themouth are also common. Associated diseases include carcinoma, lymphoma, thymoma,systemic lupus erythematosus and certain drugs such as penicillamine and captopril.This elderly man also has hepatomegaly. With the rectal bleeding and microcytic anaemia,it is likely that he has a left-sided colonic neoplasm. The raised alkaline phosphatase sug-gests secondary metastases in his liver. He needs an ultrasound to image his liver and acolonoscopy to visualize his colon. He should be referred to a surgeon to assess if pallia-tive surgery is appropriate.Pemphigus is itself life-threatening either due to insensible fluid losses or septicaemia asa result of infection of the exposed blisters. The sore mouth and eroded skin need carefulnursing. Treatment is with high doses of corticosteroids, and cytotoxic drugs may need tobe added.
106!Pemphigoid: the level of bullae is deeper (subepidermal) and the blisters are largerand rupture less often than in pemphigus.Erythema multiforme: there are target-shaped lesions with central blisters, oftenwith generalized erythema and mucosal ulceration (Stevens–Johnson syndrome).This is often associated with herpes simplex virus infection, certain drugs, e.sulphonamides and neoplasms.Dermatitis herpetiformis: there are vesicular lesions over the elbows, knees andface. Vesicles are smaller than blisters (/H110210.5 cm) and often ruptured by itching. Thisrash is associated with coeliac disease.Miscellaneous blistering disorders: diabetes mellitus, herpes gestationis andfamilial blistering disorders.Main differential diagnoses of blistering diseases
Pemphigus is often associated with underlying serious medical conditions.Pemphigus may be fatal usually due to septicaemia as a result of super-added infectionof blisters and immunosuppressive treatment
-----
A 16-year-old African-Caribbean boy presents to the emergency department complainingof severe chest pain and shortness of breath. He has had a sore throat for a few days andstarted developing pain in his back and arms which has increased in severity. Six hoursprior to admission he suddenly developed right-sided chest pain which is worse on inspir-ation and associated with marked breathlessness. He has had previous episodes of painsaffecting his fingers and back, for which he has taken codeine and ibuprofen. He was bornin London and lives with his parents and younger sister. He is attending school and hashad no problems there. There is no family history of note.

He is unwell, febrile 37.8°C and cyanosed. His conjunctivae are pale. Pulse rate is 112/min,regular and blood pressure 136/85 mmHg. His jugular venous pressure is not raised andheart sounds are normal. His respiratory rate is 28/min and there is a right pleural rubaudible. Abdominal and neurological examination is normal. There are no rashes on theskin and no joint abnormalities.
107
NormalHaemoglobin 7.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 16.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 162/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 94/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBicarbonate 24 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LArterial blood gases on air:pH 7 

 40This boy has sickle cell diseaseand presents with his first serious bony/chest crisis. Sickle celldisease occurs mainly in African black populations and sporadically in the Mediterraneanand Middle East. Haemoglobin S differs from haemoglobin A by the substitution of valine forglutamic acid at position 6 in the /H9252-chain. Sickled cells have increased mechanical fragilityand a shortened survival leading to a haemolytic anaemia, and also can block small vesselsleading to tissue infarction. Sickle cell disease has a very variable clinical course due to acombination of reasons including the haemoglobin F (HbF) level and socio-economic factors.It usually presents in early childhood with anaemia and jaundice due to a chronic haemolyticanaemia, or painful hands and feet with inflammation of the fingers due to dactylitis. Thispatient is having a pulmonary crisis characterized by pleuritic chest pain, shortness of breathand hypoxia. It is usually precipitated by dehydration or infection (in this case, a sore throat).The principal differential diagnoses of a patient presenting with pleuritic pain and breath-lessness are pneumonia, pneumothorax and pulmonary emboli.
108Thrombotic: causing generalized or localized bony pains, abdominal crises, chestcrises, neurological signs or priapism.Aplastic crises: triggered by parvovirus infection.Haemolytic anaemia.Sequestration crises in children with rapid enlargement of the liver and spleen,usually in young children.Aseptic necrosis: often of the humeral or femoral heads.Renal failure due to renal medullary infarction or glomerular disease.Hyposplenism due to autoinfarction in childhood.Major potential complications of sickle cell disease!
This patient should be admitted for rest, intravenous fluids, oxygen and adequate anal-gesia. He has a low arterial pO2and appears cyanosed. Cyanosis is more difficult to detectin the presence of anaemia. Infection should be treated with antibiotics. A blood film willshow sickled erythrocytes and elevated reticulocyte count. The definitive investigation ishaemoglobin electrophoresis which will demonstrate HbS, absent HbA and a variable HbFlevel. Partial exchange transfusion may be needed to reduce the level of his sickle cells toless than 30 per cent. He should be followed up by an expert sickle team since this has beenshown to reduce admissions and improve quality of care. He may benefit from long-termhydroxyurea which raises the HbF level and reduces the number of crises.In African-Caribbean patients, sickle cell disease should be thought of as a cause ofchest or abdominal pain.Patients with sickle cell disease should be looked after in specialized haematology unitswith psychological support available.Severe thrombotic complications should be treated with partial exchange transfusion
-----
A 25-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of pain in herright loin radiating in to the right iliac fossa. The pain developed 24 h earlier and hasbecome progressively more severe. She has not had her bowels open for 3 days.She feels alternately hot and cold and is sweaty. She has no pain on passing urine and nourinary frequency. Her last menstrual period was 3 weeks ago. She has had the occasionalepisode of acute cystitis, approximately on a 2-yearly basis. She has no other significantpast medical history.

She looks unwell and is febrile at 38. Her pulse rate is 112/min, and blood pressure104/66 mmHg. 

 of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is otherwiseunremarkable. She is tender to palpation in the right loin and right iliac fossa. There isguarding, and rebound in the right iliac fossa. Bowels sounds are sparse.
109
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLWhite cell count 17.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 366/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4 

 41This woman has acute appendicitis. Acute appendicitis classically presents with a short his-tory of central abdominal pain which rapidly localizes to the right iliac fossa. There is guard-ing and ‘board-like’ rigidity and rebound tenderness in the right iliac fossa. Untreated, somecases will resolve spontaneously, whereas others will perforate leading to localized or gener-alized peritonitis. Rarely a delayed diagnosis may result in acute appendicitis progressing toan appendix mass consisting of a haemorrhagic oedematous mass in the ileocaecal region.In this woman the right iliac fossa symptoms and signs together with the raised white cellcount and CRP are consistent with appendicitis. The symptoms of loin pain and presenceof blood and protein in the urine mimicking a urinary tract infection suggest the appen-dix may be retrocaecal. Patients with retro-ileal appendicitis often have little abdominalpain, but irritation of the ileum can lead to severe diarrhoea and vomiting. Patients mayalso present with subacute intestinal obstruction due to intestinal ileus, or urinary reten-tion due to pelvic peritonitis.
110The treatment is appendicectomy as soon as urinary tract infection has been excluded.Ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) scanning can be performed if there is uncer-tainty as to the clinical diagnosis. However a significant number of patients will have anormal appendix removed.Retrocaecal appendicitis can mimic acute pyelonephritis.In young women ectopic pregnancy and gynaecological pathology can mimic appendicitis.Elderly patients may present with atypical symptoms and signs.
!In young adults the differential diagnoses include irritable bowel syndrome, non-specific mesenteric adenitis, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, twisted or haemorrhagicovarian cysts, infection of the Fallopian tubes and urinary tract infections.In older patients perforated peptic ulcers, diverticulitis, Crohn’s disease andcarcinoma of the colon are important differential diagnoses.Differential diagnosis of acute appendicitis
-----
The medical team is asked to review a postoperative surgical patient. A 62-year-old ladyhad been admitted 10 days previously to have a right hemicolectomy performed for a cae-cal carcinoma. This was discovered on colonoscopy which was performed to investigate aniron-deficiency anaemia and change in bowel habit. She is otherwise fit with no significantmedical history. She is a retired teacher. She neither smokes nor drinks alcohol and is onno medication. Her preoperative serum creatinine was 76/H9262mol/L. The initial surgery wasuneventful, and she was given cefuroxime and metronidazole as routine antibiotic prophy-laxis. However the patient developed a prolonged ileus associated with abdominal pain. Onpostoperative day 5, the patient started to spike fevers up to 38.5°C and was commencedon intravenous gentamicin 80 mg 8 hourly in addition to the other antibiotics. Over thenext 5 days the patient remained persistently febrile, with negative blood cultures. In thelast 24 h, she has also become relatively hypotensive with her systolic blood pressure beingabout 95 mmHg despite intravenous colloids. Her urine output is now 15 mL/h.

She is unwell and sweating profusely. She is jaundiced. Her pulse rate is 110/min regular,blood pressure 95/60 mmHg and jugular venous pressure is not raised. Her heart soundsare normal. Her respiratory rate is 30/min. Her breath sounds are normal. Her abdomen istender with guarding over the right iliac fossa. Bowel sounds are absent.
111
NormalHaemoglobin 8.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 83 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 26.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 94/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 126 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 5.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 6 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 36.7 mmol/LCreatinine 523/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 2.0 mmol/LAlbumin 31 g/L 35–50 g/LBilirubin 95 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlanine transaminase 63 IU/L 5–35 IU/LAlkaline phosphatase 363 IU/L 30–300 IU/LTrough gentamicin level 4 

 42This patient has postoperative acute renal failure due to a combination of intra-abdominalsepsis and aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity. Her sepsis is due to an anastomotic leak with alocalized peritonitis which has been partially controlled with antibiotics. Her sepsis syndromeis manifested by fever, tachycardia, hypotension, hypoglycaemia, metabolic acidosis (lowbicarbonate) and oliguria. The low sodium and high potassium are common in this conditionas cell membrane function becomes less effective. The elevated white count is a marker forbacterial infection and the low platelet count is part of the picture of disseminated intravas-cular coagulation. Jaundice and abnormal liver function tests are common features of intra-abdominal sepsis. Aminoglycosides (gentamicin, streptomycin, amikacin) cause auditory andvestibular dysfunction, as well as acute renal failure. Risk factors for aminoglycoside nephro-toxicity are higher doses and duration of treatment, increased age, pre-existing renal insuffi-ciency, hepatic failure and volume depletion. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity usually occurs7–10 days after starting treatment. Monitoring of trough levels is important although anincrease in the trough level generally indicates decreased excretion of the drug caused by afall in the glomerular flow rate. Thus, nephrotoxicity is already established by the time thetrough level rises.This patient needs urgent resuscitation. She requires transfer to the intensive care unit whereshe will need invasive circulatory monitoring with an arterial line and central venous pres-sure line to allow accurate assessment of her colloid and inotrope requirements. She also needsurgent renal replacement therapy to correct her acidosis and hyperkalaemia. In a haemo-dynamically unstable patient like this, continuous haemofiltration is the preferred method.The patient also needs urgent surgical review. The abdomen should be imaged with eitherultrasound or computed tomography (CT) scanning to try to identify any collection of pus.Once haemodynamically stable, the patient should have a laparotomy to drain any collectionand form a temporary colostomy.
112Postoperative acute renal failure is often multifactorial due to hypotension, sepsis and theuse of nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides and non-steroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs (NSAIDs).Aminoglycoside drugs are extremely valuable for treating Gram-negative infections, butlevels must be monitored to avoid toxicity.Sepsis syndrome must be recognized early and treated aggressively to reduce the mor-bidity and mortality of this condition
-----
A 64-year-old woman is referred to outpatients with a 6-month history of mild abdominaldiscomfort. This has been intermittent and involved the right iliac fossa mainly. There hasbeen no particular relation to eating or to bowel movements. Over this time her appetitehas gone down a little and she thinks that she has lost around 5 kg in weight. The intensityof the pain has become slightly worse over this time and it is now present on most days.Over the last 6 weeks she has developed some new symptoms. She has developed a dif-ferent sort of cramping abdominal pain located mainly in the right iliac fossa. This painhas been associated with a feeling of the need to pass her motions and often with somediarrhoea. During these episodes her husband has commented that she looked red in theface but she has associated this with the abdominal discomfort and the embarrassmentfrom the urgent need to have her bowels open.There is no other relevant previous medical history. She has smoked 15 cigarettes daily forthe last 45 years and she drinks around 7 units of alcohol each week. She has noticed a littlebreathlessness on occasions over the last few months and has heard herself wheeze on sev-eral occasions. She has never had any problems with asthma and there is no family historyof asthma or other atopic conditions.She worked as a school secretary for 30 years and has never been involved in a job involv-ing any industrial exposure. She has no pets. She has lived all her life in London and heronly trip outside the UK was a day trip to France.1Computed tomography scan ofthe abdomen 

 43The symptoms she describes raise the possibility of a 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)-secretingcarcinoid tumour. The typical clinical features of the carcinoid syndrome are facial flush-ing, abdominal cramps and diarrhoea. Sometimes there is asthma and right-sided heartvalve problems. The symptoms are characteristically intermittent and may come at times ofincreased release on activity. Skin changes may be persistent.The CT scan of the liver shows a space-occupying lesion in the liver likely to represent ametastasis to the liver. Fluid-containing cystic lesions are of lower density. Other second-ary tumours would give a similar appearance. Carcinoids do not generally produce theirsymptoms until they have metastasized to the liver from their original site, which is usu-ally in the small bowel. In the small bowel the tumours may produce local symptoms ofobstruction or bleeding.The symptoms of carcinoid tumours are related to the secretion of 5-HT by the tumour.The diagnosis depends on finding a high level of the metabolite 5-hydroxyindole aceticacid (5-HIAA) in a 24-h collection of urine. Histology can be obtained from a liver biopsyguided to the correct area by ultrasound or CT.The symptoms can be controlled by antagonists of 5-HT such as cyproheptadine or byinhibitors of its synthesis p-chlorophenylalanine, or release, octreotide. The tumour can bereduced in size with consequent lessening of symptoms by embolization of its arterial supplyusing interventional radiology techniques.When odd symptoms such as those described here occur, the diagnosis of carcinoid tumourshould always be remembered and investigated. In real life, most of the investigations forsuspected carcinoid turn out to be negative.Carcinoid tumours can occur in the lung when they act as slowly growing malignanttumours. From the lung they can eventually be associated with left heart-valve problems.The other typical carcinoid features occur only after metastasis to the liver.
114Intermittent skin flushing, diarrhoea, wheezing and abdominal cramps are symptoms ofthe carcinoid syndrome.All these symptoms have much commoner causes.Metastasis to the liver is present before the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome occur
-----
A 28-year-old woman is admitted to the emergency department in a coma. The patientwas found unconscious on the floor by her boyfriend. She had not been seen by anyonefor the previous 48 h. No history was available from the patient, but her partner volun-teered the information that they are both intravenous heroin addicts. She is unemployed,smokes 25 cigarettes per day, drinks 40 units of alcohol per week and has used heroin forthe past 4 years. They have occasionally shared needles with other addicts. They both hadnegative HIV tests about 1 year ago. She has not made any suicide attempts in the past.She has had no other medical illnesses. She has lost touch with her family.

There are multiple old scarred needle puncture sites. Her pulse is 64/min regular, blood pres-sure 110/60 mmHg, jugular venous pressure not raised, heart sounds normal. Her respiratoryrate is 12/min, and she has dullness to percussion and bronchial breathing at the left baseposteriorly. Abdominal examination is normal. Her conscious level is depressed but she isrousable to painful stimuli. She has pinpoint pupils, but has no focal neurological signs. Abolus injection of intravenous naloxone causes her conscious level to rise transiently. Herleft arm is swollen and painful from the shoulder down.
115
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 9.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 233/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 7.7 mmol/LCreatinine 622/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBicarbonate 14 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LCalcium 1.65 mmol/LPhosphate 3.45 mmol/LCreatine kinase 68 000 IU/L 25–195 IU/LArterial blood gases on airpH 7 

 44This patient has acute renal failure as a result of rhabdomyolysis. Severe muscle damagecauses a massively elevated serum creatine kinase level, and a rise in serum potassium andphosphate levels. In this case, she has lain unconscious on her left arm for many hours dueto an overdose of alcohol and intravenous heroin. As a result, she has developed severeischaemic muscle damage causing release of myoglobin which is toxic to the kidneys.Other causes of rhabdomyolysis include crush injuries, severe hypokalaemia, excessive exer-cise, myopathies, drugs (e. ciclosporin and statins) and certain viral infections. The urineis dark because of the presence of myoglobin which causes a false-positive dipstick test forblood. Acute renal failure due to rhabdomyolysis causes profound hypocalcaemia in theoliguric phase due to calcium sequestration in muscle, and reduced 1,25-dihydroxycalciferollevels, often with rebound hypercalcaemia in the recovery phase. This woman’s consciouslevel is still depressed as a result of opiate and alcohol toxicity and she has clinical and radi-ological evidence of an aspiration pneumonia. She has a mixed metabolic and respiratoryacidosis (low pH, bicarbonate) due to acute renal failure and respiratory depression (pCO2ele-vated). Her arterial oxygenation is reduced due to hypoventilation and pneumonia. She alsohas a compartment syndrome in her arm due to massive swelling of her damaged muscles.This patient has life-threatening hyperkalaemia with electrocardiogram (ECG) changes.The ECG changes of hyperkalaemia progress from the earliest signs of peaking of the T-wave, P-wave flattening, prolongation of the PR interval through to widening of the QRScomplex, a sine-wave pattern and ventricular fibrillation. Emergency treatment involvesintravenous calcium gluconate which stabilizes cardiac conduction, and intravenousinsulin/glucose, intravenous sodium bicarbonate and nebulized salbutamol, all of whichtemporarily lower the plasma potassium by increasing the cellular uptake of potassium.However, these steps should be regarded as holding measures while urgent dialysis isbeing organized.The chest X-ray and clinical findings indicate consolidation of the left lower lobe. Thispatient should initially be managed on an intensive care unit. She will require antibioticsfor her pneumonia and will require a naloxone infusion or mechanical ventilation for herrespiratory failure. The patient should have vigorous rehydration with monitoring of hercentral venous pressure. If a good urinary flow can be maintained, urinary pH should bekept at/H110217.0 by bicarbonate infusion which prevents the renal toxicity of myoglobin. Thispatient also needs to be considered urgently for surgical fasciotomy to relieve the com-partment syndrome in her arm.In the longer term, the patient needs counselling and with her boyfriend should be offeredaccess to drug-rehabilitation services. They should also be offered testing for blood-borneviruses (hepatitis B and C and HIV).
116Acute hyperkalaemia is a life-threatening emergency.A very high creatine kinase level is diagnostic of rhabdomyolysis.As statins are now so widely used, they have become a common cause of rhabdomyoly-sis, especially when used in high dose and in combination with ciclosporin.Aggressive fluid replacement and a forced alkaline diuresis can prevent renal damage inrhabdomyolysis if started early enough
-----
A 22-year-old woman is referred to a dermatologist complaining of increasing growth ofhair affecting her face. This has progressed over at least 2 years so that now she needs toshave to remove her facial hair. She has also noticed facial acne and that her skin is moregreasy. Her periods have become very irregular with her last period being 3 months pre-viously. Her menarche was at age 13 years, but over the past 3 years her periods have beenvery erratic with her intermenstrual interval ranging from a few days to many months andher blood loss varying from light to heavy. She has had no significant medical illnessespreviously. She is taking no regular medication. She lives alone, smokes 20 cigarettes perweek and drinks about 20 units of alcohol per week. She is a student but has stoppedattending her course because she is embarassed by her appearance.

She is overweight at 16 stone. Her facial skin is greasy and she has excessive facial hair.Blood pressure is 132/82 mmHg, pulse 76/min. Physical examination is otherwise normal.
117
NormalFollicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 1 U/L 2–8 U/LLuteinizing hormone (LH) 32 U/L 6–13 U/LOestradiol 284 nmol/24 h 10–55 nmol/LTestosterone 9 

 45This patient has hirsutism and secondary amenorrhoea due to polycystic ovaries(Stein–Leventhal syndrome). This is a complex disorder characterized by excessive androgen pro-duction by the ovaries and/or adrenal cortex which interferes with ovarian follicular ripening.Patients are usually obese with the adipose tissue converting androgens to oestrogens,leading to high LH levels stimulated by positive feedback of oestrogens on the pituitary,and low FSH levels due to negative feedback. The low FSH level means that ovarian folli-cles do not mature normally. A large number of follicles develop abnormally leading toenlarged ovaries.
118!ConstitutionalDrugs, e. ciclosporin, minoxidilCushing’s syndromeCongenital adrenal hyperplasiaAndrogen-secreting tumoursHypothyroidismDifferential diagnoses of hirsutism
Patients with androgenic tumours usually have a shorter history, signs of virilism such as clit-oral hypertrophy and very high testosterone levels.1) which showed polycystic ovaries. A laparoscopic biopsy confirmed the diagnosis.Hirsutism can be treated by combined oestrogen/progestogen oral contraception (to inducesex hormone-binding globulin and thus mop up excess unbound testosterone) and by theanti-androgen, cyproterone acetate. Ovulation can be induced with clomifene or pulsatilegondotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) therapy. Dietary advice should be given to reduceobesity which otherwise helps maintain the condition. She will need social and psychologicalsupport to return to her studies and social life Ovarian ultrasound.True hirsutism is due to excessive androgens, whereas constitutional hirsutism is foundin certain ethnic groups.The association of menstrual irregularities and obesity is suggestive of true hirsutism andpolycystic ovary syndrome.In transplant patients, the anti-rejection drug ciclosporin causes marked hirsutism This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 17-year-old woman is admitted to the emergency department complaining of severevertigo. This has developed over the past few hours and previously she was well. She hasthe sensation of her surroundings spinning around her. She feels nauseated and sleepy.She does not have a headache. She has not had any previous medical illnesses. She is anon-smoker, and says that she does not drink alcohol or take recreational drugs and sheis taking no regular medication. She lives with her parents and is due to sit her A-levelsin 3 weeks. Her father suffers from epilepsy and her mother has hypothyroidism.

She is drowsy and her speech is slurred. Her pulse rate is 64/min, blood pressure 90/70 mmHgand respiratory rate 12/min. 

 of her cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominalsystems is otherwise normal. Her peripheral nervous system examination is normal apartfrom impaired co-ordination and a staggering gait. Funduscopy is normal. Her pupils areequal and reacting. There is a normal range of eye movements but she has multidirectionalnystagmus. Her hearing is normal as is the rest of her cranial nerve examination 

 46The acute onset of these symptoms and signs with drowsiness in a 17-year-old girl raisethe possibility of a drug overdose. Her father is epileptic and is likely to be taking anti-convulsants. The most likely explanation is that this patient has taken a phenytoin over-dose, tablets which her father uses to control his epilepsy. She has taken an overdose as aresult of concern about her imminent exams. Excessive ingestion of barbiturates, alcoholand phenytoin all cause acute neurotoxicity manifested by vertigo, dysarthria, ataxia andnystagmus. In severe cases coma, respiratory depression and hypotension occur.Vertigo is an awareness of disordered orientation of the body in space and takes the formof a sensation of rotation of the body or its surroundings.
122Peripheral lesions Central lesionsBenign positional vertigo Brainstem ischaemiaVestibular neuronitis Posterior fossa tumoursMénière’s disease Multiple sclerosisMiddle-ear diseases Alcohol/drugsAminoglycoside toxicity Migraine, epilepsyCauses of vertigo!
The duration of attacks is helpful in distinguishing some of these causes of vertigo. Benignpositional vertigo lasts less than 1 min. Attacks of Ménière’s disease are recurrent and lastup to 24 h. Vestibular neuronitis does not recur but lasts several days, whereas vertigo dueto ototoxic drugs is usually permanent. Brainstem ischaemic attacks occur in patients withevidence of diffuse vascular disease, and long tract signs may be present. Multiple sclero-sis may initially present with an acute attack of vertigo that lasts for 2–3 weeks. Posteriorfossa tumours usually have symptoms and signs of space-occupying lesions. Acoustic neu-romas often present with vertigo and deafness. Migrainous attacks are often accompaniedby nausea and vomiting. Temporal lobe epilepsy may also produce rotational vertigo, oftenassociated with auditory and visual hallucinations. Central lesions produce nystagmuswhich is multidirectional and may be vertical. Peripheral lesions induce a unilateral hori-zontal nystagmus.The diagnosis in this case can be made by measuring plasma phenytoin levels and by ask-ing the patient’s father to check if his tablets are missing. Gastric lavage should be carriedout if it is within 12 h of ingestion of the tablets. Oral activated charcoal may be useful.National poisons information services are available to advise on treatment. Before dis-charge she should have counselling and treatment by adolescent psychiatrists.Vertigo can be caused by a variety of neurological disorders.A careful history and examination may reveal the cause of vertigo.Overdose should be considered in any patient presenting with decreased consciouslevel and respiratory depression
-----
A 64-year-old woman has a 10-year history of retrosternal pain. The pain is often presentin bed at night and may be precipitated by bending down. Occasionally, the pain comeson after eating and on some occasions it appears to have been precipitated by exercise.The pain has been described as having a burning and a tight quality to it. The pain is nototherwise exacerbated by respiratory movements or position.Her husband has angina and on one occasion she took one of his glyceryl trinitrate tablets.She thinks that this probably helped her pain since it seemed to go off a little faster thanusual. She has also bought some indigestion tablets from a local pharmacy and thinks thatthese probably helped also.62 m (5 ft 4 in) tall and weighs 82 kg, giving her a body mass index of 31.3 (rec-ommended range 20–25) There are no abnormalities to find in the cardiovascular, respiratory or gastrointestinal systems.She had an exercise electrocardiogram (ECG) performed and she was able to perform 8-min exercise. Her heart rate went up to 130/min with no change in the ST segmentson the ECG and normal heart and blood-pressure responses.The haemoglobin, renal and liver function are normal.1Electrocardiogram 

 47A number of features in the history make oesophageal refluxa likely diagnosis. The char-acter and position of the pain and the relation to lying flat and to bending mean reflux ismore likely. She is overweight, increasing the likelihood of reflux. The improvement withglyceryl trinitrate and with proprietary antacids is inconclusive. The ECG shows one ven-tricular ectopic and some T-wave changes in leads I, aVl, V5 and V6 which would be com-patible with myocardial ischaemia but are not specific. The exercise ECG was negative whichreduces the likelihood of ischaemic heart disease although it certainly does not rule it out.Other causes of chest pain are less likely with the length of history.In view of the long history and the features suggesting oesophageal reflux, it would be rea-sonable to initiate a trial of therapy for oesophageal reflux with regular antacid therapy, H2-receptor blockers or a proton pump inhibitor (omeprazole or lansoprazole). If the painresponds to this form of therapy, then additional actions such as weight loss (she is well aboveideal body weight) and raising the head of the bed at night should be added. If doubt remains,a barium swallow should show the tendency to reflux and a gastroscopy would show evi-dence of oesophagitis. There is a broad association between the presence of oesophagealreflux, evidence of oesophagitis at endoscopy and biopsy, and the symptoms of heart burn.However, each can occur independently of the others.Recording of pH in the oesophagus over 24 h can provide additional useful information.It is achieved by passing a small pH-sensitive electrode into the oesophagus through thenose. This provides an objective measure of the amount of acid reaching the oesophagusand the times when this occurs.This woman had an endoscopy which showed oesophagitis, and treatment with omepra-zole and an alginate relieved her symptoms. Attempts at weight loss were not successful.
124In non-specific chest pain with a normal ECG, the oesophagus is a common source ofthe pain.24-h pH recording in the oesophagus provides further information on acid reflux
-----
A 44-year-old woman presents to her general practitioner (GP) complaining of headaches.These headaches have been present in previous years but have now become more intense.She describes the headaches as severe and present on both sides of her head. They tend toworsen during the course of the day. There is no associated visual disturbance or vomit-ing. She also complains of loss of appetite and difficulty sleeping, with early morning wak-ing. She has had eczema and irritable bowel syndrome diagnosed in the past but these are not giving her problems at the moment. She is divorced with two children aged 10 and12 years, whom she looks after. She has a part-time job as an office cleaner. Her motherhas recently died of a brain tumour. She smokes about 20 cigarettes per day and drinks 15units of alcohol per week. She takes regular paracetamol or ibuprofen for her headaches.

She looks withdrawn. Her pulse is 74/min and regular, blood pressure is 118/76 mmHg.

 of the cardiovascular, respiratory and gastrointestinal systems, breasts andreticuloendothelial system is normal. There are no abnormal neurological signs and fun-duscopy is normal 

 48This patient has a chronic tension headache. This is the commonest form of headache. Itoccurs mainly in patients under the age of 50 years. The headache is usually bilateral, oftenwith diffuse radiation over the vertex of the skull, although it may be more localized. Thepain is often characterized as a sense of pressure on the head. Visual symptoms and vomit-ing do not occur. The pain is often at its worst in the evening. Patients may show symp-toms of depression (this woman has biological symptoms of loss of appetite and disturbedsleep pattern). Sufferers may reveal sources of stress such as bereavement or difficulty withwork. There may be an element of suggestion as in this case, with concern that she mayhave inherited a brain tumour from her mother. She is looking after two children alone andworking part-time. A normal neurological examination is important for reassurance.
126!Classic migraine: characterized by visual symptoms followed within 30 min by theonset of severe hemicranial throbbing, headache, photophobia, nausea andvomiting lasting for several hours. The onset is usually in early adult life and apositive family history may be present.Cluster headaches: mainly affect men. The pain is unilateral, usually orbital andsevere in nature. It characteristically occurs 1–2 h after sleeping, and lasts 1–2 h andrecurs nightly for 6–8 weeks.Headache caused by a space-occupying lesion(such as tumour or abscess): Oftenthe headache is initially mild but over a few weeks becomes severe and isexacerbated by coughing or sneezing. The headache is usually worse in themorning and is associated with vomiting. There will often be other signs, includingpersonality change and focal neurological signs.Miscellaneous causes: sinusitis, dental disorders, cervical spondylosis, glaucoma,post-traumatic headache.Major differential diagnoses of chronic headaches
It is important to come to a clear diagnosis and to address the patient’s beliefs and con-cerns about the symptoms. In some circumstances it may be necessary to perform a com-puted tomography (CT) head scan for reassurance. The question of depression needs to beexplored further and may need treating with antidepressants.Tension headaches occur mainly in those aged under 50, and patients often show fea-tures of depression.Tension headache should be diagnosed after other causes have been excluded
-----
A 55-year-old man is admitted to hospital with headache and confusion. He has a coughand a temperature of 38. He does not complain of any other symptoms. Two monthsearlier he had been admitted with a productive cough and acid-fast bacilli had been foundin the sputum on direct smear. He had lost weight and complained of occasional nightsweats. He had a history of a head injury 10 years previously. He smoked 15 cigarettes aday and drank 40–60 units of alcohol each week. He was found a place in a local hostelfor the homeless and sent out after 1 week in hospital on antituberculous treatment withrifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide together with pyridoxine. His chestX-ray at the time was reported as showing probable infiltration in the right upper lobe.

He looked thin and unwell and he was slightly drowsy. His mini mental test score was8/10. There were some crackles in the upper zones of the chest posteriorly. His respiratoryrate was 22/min. There were no neurological signs 

 49The chest X-ray shows extensive changes in the right upper zone which seem as if theyare likely to be more extensive than those described at the first admission 2 months earl-ier. It is likely that this is a worsening of his pulmonary tuberculosis. This might haveoccurred because he had a resistant organism or, more likely, because he had not taken histreatment as prescribed. Risk factors for development of tuberculosis are poor nutrition,high alcohol intake and immunosuppression (HIV, immunosuppressive therapy). Higher ratesoccur in those from the Indian subcontinent and parts of Africa.The headache and confusion raise the possibility of tuberculous meningitis. Other possi-bilities would be liver damage from the antituberculous drugs and the alcohol, althoughclinical jaundice would be expected, or electrolyte imbalance. If these are not present alumbar puncture would be indicated, provided that there is no sign to suggest raisedintracranial pressure. It would be advisable to do a computed tomography (CT) scan of thebrain first since a fall related to his high alcohol consumption might have led to a sub-dural haemorrhage to give him his headache and confusion.It is now 2 months since the initial finding of acid-fast bacilli in the sputum and the cul-tures and sensitivities of the organism should now be available. These should be checkedto be sure that the organism was Mycobacterium tuberculosisand that it was sensitive to the four antituberculous drugs which he was given. As a check on compliance, bloodlevels of antituberculous drugs can be measured. The urine will be coloured orangy-red bymetabolites of rifampicin taken in the last 8 h or so.Comparison with his old chest X-rays showed extension of the right upper-lobe shadow-ing. It is difficult to be sure about activity from a chest X-ray but extension of shadow-ing is obviously suspicious. ‘Softer’ more fluffy shadowing is more likely to be associatedwith active disease. A direct smear of the sputum showed that acid-fast bacilli were stillpresent on direct smear. He confirmed that he was not taking his medication regularly. Hisheadache and confusion resolved as he stopped his high alcohol intake. Subsequently theantituberculous therapy should be given as directly observed therapy (DOT) in a thrice-weekly regime supervised at each administration by a district nurse or health visitor.
128Poor adherence to treatment regimes is the commonest cause of failure of antitubercu-lous and other treatment.Directly observed therapy should be used when there is any doubt about adherence totreatment.Four drugs should be used (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) whenthere is a higher risk of resistant organisms, e. immigrants from Africa, Asia, previouslytreated patients, patients of no fixed abode This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 29-year-old woman complained of a sudden onset of right-sided chest pain with short-ness of breath. It woke her from sleep at 3. The pain was made worse by a deepbreath and by coughing. The breathlessness persisted over the 4 h from its onset to herarrival in the emergency department. She has a slight non-productive cough. There is norelevant previous medical history except asthma controlled on salbutamol and beclometa-sone. There is no family history of note. She works as a driving instructor and had returnedfrom a 3-week holiday in Australia 3 weeks previously. She had no illnesses while she wasaway. She has taken an oral contraceptive for the last 4 years.

She has a temperature of 37.4°C, her respiratory rate is 24/min, the jugular venous pressureis raised 3 cm, the blood pressure is 110/64 mmHg and the pulse rate 128/min. Peak flow rateis 410 L/min. In the respiratory system, expansion is reduced because of pain. Percussion andtactile vocal fremitus are normal and equal. A pleural rub can be heard over the right lowerzone posteriorly. There are no other added sounds. Otherwise the examination is normal.2 shows her chest X-ray.1Electrocardiogram  

 50This woman has had a sudden onset of pleuritic pain, breathlessness and cough. The phys-ical signs of tachypnoea, tachycardia, raised jugular venous pressure and pleural rub wouldfit with a diagnosis of a pulmonary embolus. The peak flow of 410 L/min indicates thatasthma does not explain her breathlessness.The differential diagnosis would include pneumonia, pneumothorax and pulmonaryembolism. The clinical signs do not suggest pneumothorax or pneumonia. Possible predis-posing factors for pulmonary embolism are the history of a long aeroplane journey 3 weeksearlier, oral contraception and her work involving sitting for prolonged periods. Other pre-disposing factors such as intravenous drug abuse should be considered. The ECG shows asinus tachycardia. The often-quoted pattern of S-wave in lead I, Q-wave and T inversion inlead III (S1Q3T3) is not common except with massive pulmonary embolus. Other signs suchas transient right ventricular hypertrophy features, P pulmonale and T-wave changes mayalso occur. The chest X-ray is normal, ruling out pneumothorax and lobar pneumonia.A ventilation–perfusion lung scan could be done looking for a typical mismatch with anarea which is ventilated but not perfused. This result would have a high probability for adiagnosis of pulmonary embolism. A pulmonary arteriogram has been the ‘gold standard’for the diagnosis of embolism but is a more invasive test. In cases with a normal chest X-ray and no history of chronic lung disease, equivocal results are less common and it is notusually necessary to go further than the lung scan. In the presence of chronic lung diseasesuch as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or significant asthma, the ventila-tion–perfusion lung scan is more likely to be equivocal and further tests are more often used.This showed a filling defect typical of an embolus in the right lower lobe pulmonary artery.3Computedtomography pulmonaryangiogram.A search for a source of emboli with a Doppler of the leg veins may help in some cases,and the finding of negative D-dimers in the blood makes intravascular thrombosis andembolism unlikely Immediate management should involve heparin, usually as subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin. The anticoagulation can then transfer to warfarin, continued in a case likethis for 6 months. Alternative modes of contraception should be discussed and advice givenon alternating walking or other leg movements with her seated periods at work. Thrombolysisshould be considered when there is haemodynamic compromise by a large embolus.In the presence of a normal chest X-ray and no chronic lung disease, theventilation–perfusion lung scan has good sensitivity and specificity.The chest X-ray and ECG are often unhelpful in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.CT pulmonary arteriogram is used when ventilation–perfusion scanning is likely to beunhelpful
-----
A 62-year-old man is admitted to hospital with chest pain. The pain is in the centre of thechest and has lasted for 3 h by the time of his arrival in the emergency department. Thechest pain radiated to the jaw and left shoulder. He felt sick at the same time. He has a his-tory of chest pain on exercise which has been present for 6 months. He has smoked 10 cig-arettes daily for 40 years and does not drink alcohol. He has been treated with aspirin andwith beta-blockers regularly for the last 2 years and has been given a glyceryl trinitratespray to use as needed. This turns out to be two or three times a week. His father died ofa myocardial infarction aged 66 years and his 65-year-old brother had a coronary arterybypass graft 4 years ago.He has no other previous medical history. He works as a security guard.

He was sweaty and in pain but had no abnormalities in the cardiovascular or respiratorysystems. His blood pressure was 138/82 mmHg and his pulse rate was 110/min and regular.1Electrocardiogram.He was given analgesia and thrombolysis intravenously and his aspirin and beta-blockerwere continued. His pain settled and after 2 days he began to mobilize. On the fourth dayafter admission, he became more unwell.On examination, now his jugular venous pressure is raised to 6 cm above the manubrioster-nal angle. His blood pressure is 102/64 mmHg, pulse rate is 106/min and regular. His tem-perature is 37. On auscultation of the heart, there is a loud systolic murmur heard allover the praecordium. In the respiratory system, there are late inspiratory crackles at thelung bases and heard up to the mid-zones. There are no new abnormalities to find elsewhereon examination  

 51This 62-year-old man had an anteroseptal myocardial infarctionindicated by Q-wavesin V2 and V3 and raised ST segments in V2, V3, V4 and V5. He became unwell suddenly4 days later having had no initial problems. The late inspiratory crackles are typical ofpulmonary oedema and the chest X-ray confirms this showing hilar flare with some alveo-lar filling, Kerley B lines at the lung bases and blunting of the costophrenic angles withsmall pleural effusions.The problems likely to occur at this time and produce shortness of breath are a furthermyocardial infarction, arrhythmias, rupture of the chordae tendinae of the mitral valve, per-foration of the intraventricular septum or even the free wall of the ventricle, and pulmonaryemboli. The first four of these could produce pulmonary oedema and a raised jugular venouspressure as in this man. Pulmonary embolism would be compatible with a raised jugularvenous pressure but not the findings of pulmonary oedema on examination and X-ray.Acute mitral regurgitation from chordal rupture and ischaemic perforation of the inter-ventricular septum both produce a loud pansystolic murmur. The site of maximum inten-sity of the murmur may differ being apical with chordal rupture and at the lower leftsternal edge with ventricular septal defect, but this differentiation may not be possiblewith a loud murmur. The differentiation can be made by echocardiography.The management of acute ventricular septal defect or chordal rupture would be similar andshould involve consultation with the cardiac surgeons. When these lesions produce haemo-dynamic problems, as in this case, surgical repair is needed, either acutely if the problem isvery severe, or after stabilization with antifailure treatment or even counterpulsation with anaortic balloon pump. Milder degrees of failure with a pansystolic murmur may occur whenthere is ischaemia of the papillary muscles of the mitral valve. This is managed with anti-failure treatment, not surgical intervention, and can be differentiated by echocardiography.
136The cause of breathlessness after myocardial infarction needs careful evaluation.The signs of ischaemic ventricular septal defect and mitral regurgitation due to chordalrupture after myocardial infarction may be very difficult to differentiate.Patients with angina or myocardial infarction can also present with the radiating painbut no central chest pain, or with only the cardiac effects and no pain at all
-----
An 82-year-old man is sent up to the emergency department by his general practitioner(GP). He is complaining of weakness and general malaise. He has complained of generalpains in the muscles and he also has some pains in the joints, particularly the elbows, wristsand knees. Three weeks earlier, he fell and hit his leg and has some local pain related to this.He is a non-smoker who does not drink any alcohol and has not been on any medication.Twelve years ago he had a myocardial infarction and was put on a beta-blocker but he hasnot had a prescription for this in the last 6 years. Twenty years ago he had a cholecystec-tomy. He used to work as a labourer until his retirement at the age of 63 years.He lives alone in a second-floor flat. His wife died 5 years ago. He has one son who livesin Ireland and whom he has not seen for 3 years.

He is tender over the muscles around his limb girdles and there is a little tenderness overthe elbows, wrists and knees. The mouth looks normal except that his tongue appears rathersmooth. He has no teeth and has lost his dentures. There are no other abnormalities to findin the cardiovascular, respiratory or alimentary systems. In the legs, he has a superficiallaceration on the front of the right shin. This is oozing blood and has not healed. There isa petechial rash on some areas of the legs. There are some larger areas of bruising on thearms and the legs which he says have not been associated with any trauma.
137
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 74 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 7.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 6.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 1 

 52A dietary history is an essential part of any history and is particularly important here wherea number of features point towards a possible nutritional problem. He has been a widowerfor 5 years with no family support. He lives alone on a second-floor flat which may makeit difficult for him to get out. He has lost his dentures which is likely to make it difficult forhim to eat.He has a petechial rash which could be related to coagulation problems, but the platelet countis normal. It would be important to examine the rash carefully to see if it is distributed aroundthe hair follicles. A number of the features suggest a possible diagnosis of scurvyfrom vita-min C deficiency. Body stores of vitamin C are sufficient to last 2–3 months. The rash, muscleand joint pains and tenderness, poor wound healing and microcytic anaemia are all featuresof scurvy. The classic feature of bleeding from the gums would not be present in an edentu-lous patient.Plasma measurements of vitamin C are difficult because of the wide range in normal sub-jects. In this patient, replacement with ascorbic acid orally cleared up the symptoms within2 weeks. It would be important to look for other nutritional deficiencies in this situationand to make arrangements to ensure that the situation did not recur after his dischargefrom hospital.
138A nutritional history should be part of any clinical assessment, particularly in the elderly.Vitamin deficiencies can occur in patients on a poor diet in the absence of any problemwith malabsorption
-----
An unkempt man of uncertain age, estimated to be 55–65 years, is brought in to hospital byambulance having been found unconscious on the pavement outside a pub on New Year’seve. There is no other available history. A used packet of paracetamol and dihydrocodeine isfound in one of his pockets but no illicit drugs and no means of identification.On examination he looks pale and smells of alcohol and urine. There are no signs of headinjury and no localizing neurological signs.

Tendon reflexes are present and equal except the ankle reflexes which are absent. Plantarresponses are downgoing. The pupils are equal and reactive and the fundi look normal.The observation chart is completed by the nurse in the emergency department.
139
Pulse: 82/minBlood pressure: 92/56 mmHgTemperature: 35.1Electrocardiogram 

 53This man has been unconscious in the open air for an unknown period. Little history isavailable, but the tablets in his pocket might suggest that he has a problem with a painfulcondition. There are a number of possible causes for his unconsciousness including a cere-brovascular problem, deliberate or accidental drug overdose, including alcohol poisoning,metabolic or endocrine disturbance or hypothermia.If this were an overdose, e. of dihydrocodeine, the pupils might well be small. The slowrespiratory rate could be compatible with an opiate excess suppressing ventilation. Theoxygen saturation results show that he is oxygenating himself satisfactorily although itwould be sensible to perform blood gases to measure the arterial partial pressure of CO2(paCO2). It would be appropriate to measure the paracetamol level in the blood and it wouldbe worth giving the opiate antagonist naloxone if there remained a likelihood of overdose.The blood alcohol level should be measured to exclude alcohol poisoning.Most cerebrovascular problems would be expected to produce some localizing neuro-logical signs on careful examination even in an unconscious patient. There are no suchsigns here. The absent ankle jerks might be related to his age.He could have hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma detected by a high glucose and evidenceof haemoconcentration. The blood glucose should be measured together with electrolytesand haematology but the single/H11001of glucose in the urine makes it unlikely that he hashyperglycaemic coma. Liver function and renal function should be measured.He has a slow respiratory rate, low blood pressure and an ECG which shows a wide QRScomplex. The wide complexes on the ECG show an extra deflection at the end of the QRScomplex, the J point. The pulse rate would often beslower than the 82/min in this man and the ECG may show evidence of a tremor fromshivering. The temperature of 35.1°C does not appear excessively low but this may not bereliable if it is not a true core temperature or has been measured with a normal mercurythermometer (mercury thermometers are not reliable at low temperatures). Indeed, in this case,repeat of the rectal temperature measurement with a low-reading thermometer showed a tem-perature of 30. No paracetamol was detected in the blood and his alcohol level was low at11 mg/100 mL.2Electrocardiogram of resolved hypothermia The management of hypothermia is gradual passive rewarming with replacement of fluidsby warmed colloids as rewarming takes place. The increase of temperature should be0. If this is not achieved by covering the patient with blankets, then warmedinspired oxygen, warm intravenous fluids, bladder or peritoneal lavage might be consid-ered. Drugs and physical disturbance should be limited since the myocardium is often irri-table and susceptible to arrhythmias.
141Hypothyroidism should be considered as a possible contributor to hypothermia.Even when alcohol is a cause of unconsciousness, other causes must be excluded.The diagnosis of hypothermia requires a thermometer capable of reading low temperatures.J-waves on the ECG are specific signs of hypothermia.Hypothermia in the elderly is treated by gradual passive rewarming This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 22-year-old woman complains of tiredness for 6 months. Her only other symptom is agradual increase in frequency of bowel movements from once a day in her teens to two tothree times daily. She has no abdominal pain and has no change in appetite. She says thatthe bowel movements can be difficult to flush away on occasions but this is not a consist-ent problem. She is a non-smoker and drinks rarely. She has been a vegetarian for 5 yearsbut eats dairy foods and fish regularly. She thinks that her grandmother, who lived inIreland, had some bowel problems but she died 3 years ago, aged 68. She is an infant-school teacher and spends a lot of her spare time in keep-fit classes and routines at a localgym. She enjoys her work and socializes regularly with a wide circle of friends.62 m (5 ft 4 in) tall and weighs 49 kg. She looks a little pale and thin. 

of her abdomen showed no abnormalities and there are no other significant abnormalitiesto find in any other system.
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 98 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 247/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LRed cell folate 44 mg/L/H11022160 mg/LVitamin B12280 ng/L 176–925 ng/LThyroid-stimulating hormone 3.0 mU/LFree thyroxine 12.0 pmol/LThe blood film is reported as a dimorphic film with remnants of nuclear material(Howell–Jolly bodies) in some of the red blood cells 

 54The most likely diagnosis is malabsorption from coeliac disease.The report of a dimorphicblood film means that there are both small and large cells. This suggests that the anaemiais caused by a combination of the folate deficiency indicated by the red cell folate and byiron deficiency. The Howell–Jolly bodies are dark blue regular inclusions in the red cellswhich are typically found in the blood of patients after splenectomy, or are associated withthe splenic atrophy which is characteristic of coeliac disease. In coeliac disease, there is asensitivity to dietary gluten, a water-insoluble protein found in many cereals. The proximalsmall bowel is the main site involved with loss of villi and an inflammatory infiltrate caus-ing reduced absorption.The MCV is at the upper limit of normal.
144Folate deficiencyVitamin B12deficiencyExcessive alcohol consumptionHypothyroidismCertain drugs, e. azathioprine, methotrexatePrimary acquired sideroblastic anaemia and myelodysplastic syndromesCauses of macrocytosis in the blood film!
Coeliac disease is made more likely by a possible positive family history and the originfrom Ireland where coeliac disease is four times as common as in the rest of the UK. Otherdiagnoses which might be considered are anorexia nervosa (her age and sex, commitmentto exercise); she does not appear depressed (a common cause of weight loss and bowel dis-turbance) and the laboratory findings clearly indicate physical disease.Diagnosis of coeliac disease can be confirmed by endoscopy at which a biopsy can be takenfrom the distal duodenum. Typically this will show complete villus atrophy. Antigliadinantibodies are usually positive and can be a useful screening test. The treatment is a gluten-free diet with a repeat of the biopsy some months later to show improvement in the heightof the villi in the small bowel. In some cases, temporary treatment with steroids may beneeded to help recovery. Another common cause of failure to recover the villus architec-ture is poor compliance to the difficult dietary constraints.Howell–Jolly bodies are characteristic of hyposplenism.Coeliac disease can present at any age with non-specific symptoms; absence of abdom-inal pain and/or steatorrhoea are not unusual.Typical features of fat malabsorption may not be evident if the patient eats a diet with little or no fat intake
-----
A 45-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with pneumonia. She has had three episodesof cough, fever and purulent sputum over the last 6 months. One of these was associatedwith right-sided pleuritic chest pain. These have been treated at home by her general prac-titioner (GP). In addition she has a 5-year history of difficulty with swallowing. Initiallythis was mild but it has become progressively worse. She says that food seems to stick inthe low retrosternal area. This applies to all types of solid food. She has lost 5 kg in weightover the last 2 months. Sometimes the difficulty with swallowing seems to improve duringa meal. Recently she has had trouble with regurgitation and vomiting of recognizable food.Three years ago her GP arranged for an outpatient upper gastrointestinal endoscopy whichwas normal. She was reassured, but the problem has increased in severity. There is no otherrelevant medical history or family history. She lived in the north-west coast of the UnitedStates for 4 years up until 10 years ago. She works as a shop assistant. She has never smokedand drinks less than 5 units of alcohol each week. There has been no disturbance of mic-turition. She has always tended to be constipated and this has been a little worse recently.

She looks thin. In the respiratory system there are some crackles at the right base. Thereare no abnormalities to find in the cardiovascular system, abdomen or other systems. (repro-duced with the kind permissionfrom Curtis and Whitehouse,Radiology for the MRCP ,Arnold, 1998 

 55The likely diagnosis is achalasia of the cardia, a primary neurological disturbance of thenerve plexuses at the lower end of the oesophagus. The X-ray shows a dilated fluid-filledoesophagus with no visible gastric air bubble. Endoscopy may be normal in the early stagesas in this case. The oesophagus has now dilated and there has been spill-over of stagnant foodinto the lungs giving her the episodes of repeated respiratory infections. Such aspiration ismost likely to affect the right lower lobe because of the more vertical right main bronchus,although the result of aspiration at night may depend on the position of the patient. The dys-phagia is often variable early on. It tends to be present for all foods, indicating a motilityproblem, and there may initially be some relief from the mechanical load as the oesophagusfills. Dysphagia for bulky, solid foods first usually indicates an obstructive lesion.The diagnosis can be made at this stage by a barium swallow showing the dilated oesopha-gus. Earlier it may require careful cine-radiology with a bolus of food impregnated withbarium, or oesophageal motility studies using a catheter fitted with a number of pressuresensors to detect the abnormal motility of the oesophageal muscle.A similar condition can be produced by the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi(Chagas’disease), but this is limited to South and Central America and would not be relevant to herstay in the north-west United States.Other common causes of dysphagia are benign oesophageal structures from acid reflux,malignant structures, external compression or an oesophageal pouch. Achalasia may bemanaged by muscle relaxants when mild, but often requires treatment to disrupt the loweroesophageal muscle by dilatation or surgery.
146The subjective site of blockage in dysphagia may not reflect accurately the level of theobstruction.Persistent dysphagia without explanation needs investigation by barium swallow orendoscopy
-----
A 63-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) complaining that over the past3 months he has developed severe generalized itching. This is particularly severe after a hotbath. He has also noticed frequent headaches, dizziness and tinnitus. He has been hyper-tensive for 10 years. He smokes 35 cigarettes a day and drinks about 25 units of alcohol perweek. He takes bendroflumethiazide for his hypertension. He works as a chef, is divorcedand lives alone.

His face looks plethoric. There are no signs of chronic liver disease and nolymphadenopathy. His pulse is 84/min regular and blood pressure 162/104 mmHg. Exami-nation of his heart and respiratory system is normal. In his abdomen the only abnormalityis that his spleen is palpable 4 cm below the left costal margin. Neurological examinationis normal.
147
NormalHaemoglobin 18.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 88 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 14.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 598/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4 

 56This patient has polycythaemia rubra vera. This is due to abnormal proliferation of redcell precursors derived from a single haematopoietic progenitor cell with the capacity fordifferentiation down red cell, white cell and platelet lines. As a result, there is an increasein haemoglobin, white cell count and platelet level. Patients may present with a throm-botic event or with symptoms due to increased blood viscosity such as headaches, tinni-tus and blurred vision. There is an increased bleeding tendency. Splenomegaly is common.Severe pruritus is characteristic and is particularly related to warmth occurring on gettinginto a warm bed or bath.
148Obstructive jaundice due to bile salt retentionIron deficiencyLymphomaCarcinoma, especially bronchialChronic renal failure, partially due to phosphate retentionConditions associated with generalized pruritus without a rash!This patient should be referred to a haematology unit for investigation. It is important toexclude relative polycythaemia due to dehydration from diuretic and alcohol use. The redcell mass will be raised in polcythaemia rubra vera, but normal in relative polycythaemia.The following causes of secondary polycythaemia must be excluded:chronic lung disease with hypoxiacyanotic congenital heart diseaserenal cysts, tumours, renal transplantshepatoma, cerebellar haemangioblastoma, uterine fibroidsCushing’s disease.The erythropoietin level is low in polycythaemia rubra vera and high in secondary poly-cythaemia. Pulse oximetry or arterial blood gases should be performed to exclude hypoxia.The leucocyte alkaline phosphatase level is also raised in polycythaemia rubra vera.The patient should be venesected until the haematocrit is within the normal range. A var-iety of agents can be used to keep the haematocrit down: 32P, hydroxyurea and busulphan.The disease may transform into acute leukaemia or myelosclerosis.Severe generalized pruritus is a characteristic symptom of polycythaemia rubra vera This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 29-year-old man presents with a cough and some mild aches in the hands, wrists andankles. The symptoms have been present for 2 months and have increased slightly overthat time. Six weeks before he had some soreness of his eyes, which resolved in 1 week.The cough has been non-productive. He had noticed some skin lesions on the edge of thehairline and around his nostrils. Previously he had been well apart from an appendicec-tomy at the age of 17 years.He was born in Trinidad and came to the UK at the age of 4 years. His two brothers andparents are well. He does not smoke, is teetotal and takes no recreational drugs. He worksas a messenger and took regular exercise until the last few weeks.

There is no deformity of the joints and no evidence of any acute inflammation. In the respiratory and cardiovascular system there are no abnormal findings. In the skin thereare some slightly raised areas on the edge of the hairline posteriorly and at the ala nasae.They are a little lighter than the rest of the skin.
NormalHaemoglobin 13.0 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 88 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 8.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 264/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 34 mm/H1102110 mm/hSodium 140 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 74/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 14 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 84 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 44 IU/L 5–35 IU/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1  

 57The likely diagnosis is sarcoidosis. The age is typical and sarcoidosis is more common inthose of African-Caribbean origin. The chest X-ray shows bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.The blood results show a slightly raised calcium level which is related to vitamin D sensi-tivity in sarcoidosis where the granulomas hydroxylate 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. The ESR is raised and some of the liver enzymes are around theupper limit of normal. The skin lesions at the hairline and the nostrils are typical sites forsarcoid skin problems. The eye trouble 6 weeks earlier might also have been a manifesta-tion of sarcoidosis, which can cause both anterior and posterior uveitis.An alternative diagnosis which might explain the findings is tuberculosis. Tuberculosis canalso cause hypercalcaemia although this is much less common than in sarcoid. Tumours,especially lymphoma, might give this X-ray appearance but would not explain the otherfindings. The arthralgia (pains with no evidence of acute inflammation or deformity onexamination) can occur in sarcoid or tuberculosis but again they are commoner in sarcoid.The ESR is non-specific. Arthralgia without deformity in an African-Caribbean man raisesthe possibility of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), but this would be much commonerin women and would not cause bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.He is likely to have had BCG (bacille Calmette–Guèrin) vaccination at school at around the ageof 12 years, giving a degree of protection against tuberculosis. A tuberculin test should be pos-itive after BCG, strongly positive in most cases of tuberculosis and negative in 80 per cent ofcases of sarcoidosis. The serum level of angiotensin-converting enzyme would be raised inover 80 per cent of cases of sarcoidosis but often in tuberculosis also; the granuloma cellssecrete this enzyme. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest will confirm the extent ofthe lymphadenopathy and show whether there is any involvement of the lung parenchyma.Histology of affected tissue would confirm the clinical diagnosis. This might be obtained by askin biopsy of one of the lesions. A bronchial or transbronchial lung biopsy at fibreoptic bron-choscopy would be another means of obtaining diagnostic histology. In patients with a coughand sarcoidosis the bronchial mucosa itself often looks abnormal, and biopsy will provide thediagnosis. Lung function tests and electrocardiogram (ECG) should be performed as a baselineif the diagnosis is confirmed.Steroid treatment would not be necessary for the hilar lymphadenopathy alone, but wouldbe indicated for the hypercalcaemia and possibly for the systemic symptoms.
152Sarcoidosis is commoner in African-Caribbeans.Typical sites for skin lesions are around the nose and the hairline.Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease and can affect most parts of the body
-----
A 63-year-old woman is referred to a nephrologist for investigation of polyuria. About 4weeks ago she developed abrupt-onset extreme thirst and polyuria. She is getting up topass urine five times a night. Over the past 3 months she has felt generally unwell andnoted pain in her back. She has lost 3 kg in weight over this time. She also has a persist-ent frontal headache associated with early morning nausea. The headache is worsened bycoughing or lying down. Eight years previously she had a left mastectomy and radiother-apy for carcinoma of the breast. She is a retired civil servant who is a non-smoker and drinks10 units of alcohol per week. She is on no medication.

She is thin and her muscles are wasted. Her pulse rate is 72/min, blood pressure120/84 mmHg, jugular venous pressure is not raised, heart sounds are normal and she hasno peripheral oedema. 

 of her respiratory, abdominal and neurological sys-tems is normal. Her fundi show papilloedema.
153
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 312/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 142 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 26 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 68/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LAlbumin 38 g/L 35–50 g/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 58This woman has mild hypercalcaemia but this is not high enough to explain her extremethirst and polyuria. It is more likely that she has polyuria due to neurogenic diabetesinsipidus as a result of secondary metastases in her hypothalamus. The hypercalcaemiaand raised alkaline phosphatase are suggestive of bony metastases secondary to her breastcarcinoma. The recent-onset headache, worsened by coughing and lying down and associ-ated with vomiting is characteristic of raised intracranial pressure, which is confirmed by thepresence of papilloedema. In some tumours around the pituitary there may be compressionof the optic nerve causing visual field abnormalities. Neurogenic diabetes insipidus is due toinadequate arginine vasopressin (AVP, antidiuretic hormone) secretion. About 30 per cent ofcases of neurogenic diabetes insipidus are idiopathic. The remaining causes are neoplastic,infectious, inflammatory (granulomas), traumatic (neurosurgery, deceleration injury) or vas-cular (cerebral haemorrhage, infarction). Patients with central diabetes insipidus typicallydescribe an abrupt onset of polyuria and polydipsia. This is because urinary concentrationcan be maintained fairly well until the number of AVP-secreting neurones in the hypothal-amus decreases to 10–15 per cent of the normal number, after which AVP levels decrease toa range where urine output increases dramatically.
154Solute diuresis, e. diabetes mellitus.Renal diseases which impair urinary concentrating mechanisms, e. chronic renalfailure.Drinking abnormalities: psychogenic polydipsia.Renal resistance to the action of AVP.Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (due to inherited defects either in the AVP V2receptor or the aquaporin-2 receptor)HypokalaemiaHypercalcaemiaDrugs, e. lithium, demeclocycline.Major causes of polyuria and polydipsia!
A water-deprivation test should be performed in this patient, measuring the plasma sodium,urine volume and urine osmolality until the sodium rises above 146 mmol/L, or the urineosmolality reaches a plateau and the patient has lost at least 2 per cent of body weight. Atthis point AVP is measured, and the response to subcutaneous desmopressin is measured. An increase in urine osmolality/H1102250 per cent indicates central diabetes insipidus and/H1102110per cent nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.1 shows thickening of the pituitary stalk due to metastatic disease (short arrow) andpartial replacement of the normal bone marrow of the clivus by metastatic tumour (longarrow). Treatment of the neurogenic diabetes insipidus involves regular intranasal DDAVP(L-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin). She should be referred to an oncologist for treatmentof her metastatic carcinoma Magnetic resonance imagingscan through the pituitary.The commonest causes of polyuria are diabetes mellitus and chronic renal failure.Breast carcinoma may recur after several years of remission This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 52-year-old businessman is referred to a nephrologist for investigation of microscopichaematuria. This was first detected 6 months ago at an insurance medical for a new job,and has since been confirmed on two occasions by his general practitioner (GP). Previousurinalyses have been normal. He has never had macroscopic haematuria, and has no urin-ary symptoms. He is otherwise in excellent health. There is no significant past medical his-tory. He has no symptoms of visual problems or deafness. There is no family history ofrenal disease. He drinks 35 units of alcohol per week and smokes 30 cigarettes per day.

He is a fit looking well-nourished man. His pulse is 72/min, blood pressure 146/102 mmHg.Otherwise, examination of his cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and neurological sys-tems is unremarkable. Funduscopy reveals arteriovenous nipping.
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 83 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 213/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 141/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LAlbumin 38 g/L 35–50 g/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LBilirubin 13 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlanine transaminase 33 IU/L 5–35 IU/LAlkaline phosphatase 72 IU/L 30–300 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 211 IU/L 11–51 IU/LUrinalysis:/H11001/H11001protein;/H11001/H11001blood;/H11022100 red cells24-h urinary protein: 1 

 59Microscopic haematuria has many renal and urological causes, e. prostatic disease,stones, but the presence of significant proteinuria, hypertension and renal impairment sug-gest this man has some form of chronic glomerulonephritis. The high gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase level is compatible with liver disease related to a high alcohol intake. Therecommended upper limit for men is 28 units per week.
158Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathyThin basement membrane diseaseAlport’s syndrome (predominantly affects males)Commonest glomerular causes of microscopic haematuria!IgA nephropathy is the commonest glomerulonephritis in developed countries, and is char-acterized by diffuse mesangial deposits of IgA. Patients often have episodes of macroscopichaematuria concurrent with upper respiratory tract infection. Most cases of IgA nephrop-athy are idiopathic, but this it is also commonly associated with Henoch–Schönlein purpuraand alcoholic cirrhosis. This man has IgA nephropathyin association with alcoholic liverdisease. About 20 per cent of patients with IgA nephropathy will develop end-stage renalfailure after 20 years of follow-up.Thin basement membrane disease is a familial disorder which presents with isolated micro-scopichaematuria, minimal proteinuria and normal renal function that does not deteri-orate. Electron microscopy shows diffuse thinning of the glomerular basement membranes(the width is usually between 150 and 225 nm versus 300–400 nm in normal subjects).Alport’s syndrome is a progressive form of glomerular disease, associated with deafnessand ocular abnormalities and is usually inherited as an X-linked dominant condition sothat males are more seriously affected.This patient should have a renal biopsy to reach a histological diagnosis. As the patient isover 50 years old he should have urine cytology/prostate-specific antigen/cystoscopy per-formed to exclude concurrent bladder and prostatic lesions. He needs a liver ultrasound,and liver biopsy should be considered.The patient should be advised to abstain from alcohol, and needs his blood pressure con-trolling. He needs regular follow-up as he is at risk of progressing to dialysis and/or renaltransplantation. The raised creatinine appears modest in terms of the actual figures, but asplasma/serum creatinine does not begin to rise until the glomerular filtration rate is reducedto 50 per cent of normal (irrespective of the patient’s age), the raised creatinine in this caseindicates a serious loss of renal function to approximately 40 per cent of normal. There isno convincing evidence for immunosuppression retarding the progression into renal fail-ure in most patients with IgA nephropathy.Patients with isolated haematuria aged/H1102150 years should be initially referred to anephrologist.Patients with isolated haematuria aged/H1102250 years should be initially referred to a urolo-gist for investigation, to exclude bladder or prostatic disease.Small elevations in serum/plasma creatinine indicate large loss in renal function.Liver damage from a high alcohol intake may occur with no obvious signs and symptoms
-----
A 67-year-old man attends his general practitioner’s (GP’s) surgery. He says that he haslost 10 kg in weight over the last 4 months. This has been associated with a decrease inappetite and an increasing problem with vomiting. The vomiting has been productive offood eaten many hours previously. During the last month he has noticed some weakness,particularly in his legs, climbing hills and stairs.He is a smoker of 20 cigarettes per day and drinks around 10 units of alcohol each week.There is no relevant family history. His past medical history consists of hypertension whichwas treated for 2 years with beta-blockers. He stopped taking these 4 months ago.

He looks thin and unwell. His pulse is 82/min. His blood pressure is 148/86 mmHg. Thereare no abnormalities to find on examination of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.There are no masses to feel in the abdomen and no tenderness, but a succussion splash ispresent.
159
NormalSodium 130 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.0 mmol/LChloride 82 mmol/L 95–105 mmol/LBicarbonate 41 mmol/L 25–35 mmol/LUrea 15.7 mmol/LCreatinine 100/H9262mol/L 76–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 60The clinical picture suggests obstruction to outflow from the stomach. This would be com-patible with vomiting of residual food some time after eating and the succussion splash fromthe retained fluid and food in the stomach. The biochemical results fit with this diagnosis.There is a rise in urea but not creatinine, suggesting a degree of dehydration. Sodium, chlor-ide and hydrogen ions are lost in the vomited stomach contents. Loss of hydrochloric acidproduces a metabolic alkalosis. In compensation, hydrogen ions are retained by exchangefor potassium in the kidney and across the cell membranes, so leading to hypokalaemia, andcarbonic acid dissociates to hydrogen ions and bicarbonate. The hypokalaemia indicates a considerable loss of total body potassium, which is mostly in the skeletal muscle, andexplains the patient’s recent weakness.The most likely cause would be a carcinoma of the stomach involving the pyloric antrumand producing obstruction to outflow. A chronic gastric ulcer in this area could producethe same picture from associated scarring, and gastroscopy and biopsy would be neces-sary to be sure of the diagnosis.Gastroscopy may be difficult because of retained food in the stomach. In this case, afterthis was washed out a tumour was visible at the pylorus causing almost complete obstruc-tion of the outflow tract of the stomach. The next step would be a computed tomography(CT) scan of the abdomen to look for metastases in the liver and any suggestion of localspread of the tumour outside the stomach. If there is no evidence of extension or spread,or even to relieve obstruction, laparotomy and resection should be considered. Otherwisechemotherapy and surgical palliation are treatment options.
160Vomiting food eaten a long time previously suggests gastric outlet obstruction.Mild-to-moderate dehydration tends to increase urea more than creatinine.Prolonged vomiting causes a typical picture of hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis.Carcinoma of the stomach can present without abdominal pain or anaemia
-----
A 52-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by ambulance. His wife givesa history that, while standing at a bus stop, he fell to the ground and she was unable torouse him. His breathing seemed to stop for about 20 s. He then developed jerking move-ments affecting his arms and legs lasting for about 2 min. She noticed that his face becameblue and that he was incontinent of urine. He started to recover consciousness after a fewminutes although he remains drowsy with a headache. The man has not complained of anysymptoms prior to this episode. There is no significant past medical history. He is a taxidriver. He smokes 20 cigarettes per day and consumes about three pints of beer each night.

He looks a fit and well-nourished man. There is some bleeding from histongue. His pulse is 84/min and regular. His blood pressure is 136/84 mmHg. 

of his heart, chest and abdomen is normal. There is no neck stiffness and there are no focalneurological signs. Funduscopy is normal. His Mini-mental test score is normal.
161
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 5.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 243/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 76/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4.0 mmol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 61This man has had an episode characterized by sudden onset loss of consciousness associ-ated with the development of generalized convulsions. The principal differential diagnosisis between an epileptic fit and a syncopal (fainting) attack. Syncope is a sudden loss of con-sciousness due to temporary failure of the cerebral circulation. Syncope is distinguishedfrom a seizure principally by the circumstances in which the event occurs. For example,syncope usually occurs while standing, under situations of severe stress or in associationwith an arrhythmia. Sometimes a convulsion and urinary incontinence occur. Thus, neitherof these is specific for an epileptic attack. The key is to establish the presence or absence ofprodromal symptoms. Syncopal episodes are usually preceded by symptoms of dizziness andlight-headedness. Other important neurological syndromes to exclude are transient ischaemicattacks, migraine, narcolepsy and hysterical convulsions. Transient ischaemic attacks arecharacterized by focal neurological signs and no loss of consciousness unless the verte-brobasilar territory is affected. The onset of migraine is gradual, and consciousness is rarelylost. In narcolepsy, episodes of uncontrollable sleep may occur but convulsive movementsare absent and the patient can be wakened.In this man’s case the episode was witnessed by his wife who gave a clear history of a grandmal (tonic–clonic seizure). There may be warning symptoms such as fear, or an abnormalfeeling referred to some part of the body – often the epigastrium – before consciousness islost. The muscles become tonically contracted and the person will fall to the ground. Thetongue may be bitten and there is usually urinary incontinence. Due to spasm of the respi-ratory muscles, breathing ceases and the subject becomes cyanosed. After this tonic phase,which can last up to a minute, the seizure passes into the clonic or convulsive phase. Afterthe contractions end, the patient is stupurose which lightens through a stage of confusion tonormal consciousness. There is usually a post-seizure headache and generalized muscularaches.In adults, idiopathic epilepsy rarely begins after the age of 25 years. Blood tests should beperformed to exclude metabolic causes such as uraemia, hyponatraemia, hypoglycaemiaand hypocalcaemia. Blood alcohol levels and gamma-glutamyltransferase levels shouldalso be measured as markers of alcohol abuse. A computed tomography (CT) scan of thebrain is needed to exclude a structural cause such as a brain tumour or cerebrovascularevent. This man should be referred to a neurologist for further investigation including anelectroencephalogram (EEG). This is necessary as he will probably not be able to continuein his occupation as a taxi driver. Treatment with anticonvulsants for a single fit is alsocontroversial.
162It is vital to get an eye-witness account of a transient neurological episode to make adiagnosis.New-onset epilepsy is rare in adults and should therefore be fully investigated toexclude an underlying cause
-----
A 38-year-old man presents to a neurologist having been referred because of memory lossand difficulty with concentration. He has recently lost his job in a high-street bank becauseof his increasingly poor performance at work. His wife and friends have noticed the declinein his memory for recent events over the past 6 months. The patient is sleeping poorly andhas developed involuntary jerking movements of his limbs especially at night. He appearsto his wife to be very short-tempered and careless of his personal appearance. He is mar-ried with two children and neither smokes tobacco nor drinks alcohol. He is not taking anyregular medication. Aged 15, he received 2 years’ treatment with growth hormone injec-tions because of growth failure.

In the nervous system, muscle bulk, power, tone and reflexes are normal but there are occa-sional myoclonic jerks in his legs. The examination of cardiovascular, respiratory andabdominal systems is entirely normal. Funduscopy is normal. Mini-mental test scoring isgrossly subnormal (4 out of 10) 

 62The mental test score is very low at 4 out of 10, indicating severe impairment of cognitivefunction. A longer Mini-mental State 

 involves more questions scoring out of30. The combination of a short history of rapidly advancing dementia often with focal neuro-logical symptoms or signs would fit a diagnosis of Creutzfeld–Jakob disease(CJD). Theremay be focal or generalized fits and myoclonus is common. Speech may become severelyaffected and the patient may become mute. CJD may be familial or transmitted by prions bymeans of neurosurgical operations, corneal transplants or injections of growth hormone isol-ated from human pituitary glands. New-variant CJD (nvCJD) is thought to be the humanequivalent of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (‘mad cow disease’) due to ingestion ofprions in infected cattle products. nvCJD often presents with psychiatric features and hascharacteristic neuropathological features.Dementia is a progressive decline in mental ability affecting intellect, behaviour and per-sonality. The earliest symptoms of dementia are an impairment of higher intellectual func-tions manifested by an inability to grasp a complex situation. Memory becomes impairedfor recent events and there is usually increased emotional lability. In the later stages ofdementia the patient becomes careless of appearance and eventually incontinent.
164Alzheimer’s diseaseMulti-infarct dementiaAs part of progressive neurological diseases, e. multiple sclerosisNormal pressure hydrocephalus: dementia, ataxia, urinary incontinenceNeurosyphilis: general paralysis of the insaneVitamin B12deficiencyIntracranial tumours; subdural haematomasHypothyroidismAIDS dementiaCauses of dementia!
The investigations in this patient should include a full blood count, erythrocyte sedimenta-tionrate, serum urea and electrolytes, serum calcium, thyroid function tests, liver functiontests, venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) for syphilis, vitamin B12and folic acid,HIV serology and computed tomography (CT) of the head. In CJD, the CT scan is usuallynormal, reflecting the rapid course of the disease with little time for atrophy.There is no treatment for this condition. The neurologist must discuss with the family thediagnosis and prognosis. Counselling and support should be provided.Dementia at an early age requires rapid investigation to exclude a treatable cause.Most patients with presenile dementia have Alzheimer’s disease
-----
A 35-year-old woman has a year-long history of intermittent diarrhoea which has neverbeen bad enough for her to seek medical help in the past. However, she has become muchworse over 1 week with episodes of bloody diarrhoea 10 times a day. She has had somecrampy lower abdominal pain which lasts for 1–2 h and is partially relieved by defaeca-tion. Over the last 2–3 days she has become weak with the persistent diarrhoea and herabdomen has become more painful and bloated over the last 24 h.She has no relevant previous medical history. Up to 1 year ago, her bowels were regular.There is no disturbance of micturition or menstruation. In her family history, she thinks oneof her maternal aunts may have had bowel problems. She has two children aged 3 and 8years. They are both well. She travelled to Spain on holiday 6 months ago but has not trav-elled elsewhere.She smokes 10 cigarettes a day and drinks rarely. She took 2 days of amoxicillin after thediarrhoea began with no improvement or worsening of her bowels.

Her blood pressure is 108/66 mmHg. Her pulse rate is 110/min, respiratory rate 18/min. Herabdomen is rather distended and tender generally, particularly in the left iliac fossa. Faintbowel sounds are audible. The abdominal X-ray shows a dilated colon with no faeces.
165
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 79 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 8.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 280/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3 

 63Bloody diarrhoea 10 times a day suggests a serious active colitis. In the absence of anyrecent foreign travel it is most likely that this is an acute episode of ulcerative colitison topof chronic involvement. The dilated colon suggests a diagnosis of toxic megacolon whichcan rupture with potentially fatal consequences. Investigations such as sigmoidoscopy andcolonoscopy may be dangerous in this acute situation, and should be deferred until there hasbeen reasonable improvement. The blood results show a microcytic anaemia suggestingchronic blood loss, low potassium from diarrhoea (explaining in part her weakness) andraised urea, but a normal creatinine, from loss of water and electrolytes.If the history was just the acute symptoms, then infective causes of diarrhoea would behigher in the differential diagnosis. Nevertheless, stool should be examined for ova, para-sites and culture. Inflammatory bowel disorders have a familial incidence but the patient’saunt has an unknown condition and the relationship is not close enough to be helpful indiagnosis. Smoking is associated with Crohn’s disease but ulcerative colitis is more com-mon in non-smokers.She should be treated immediately with corticosteroids and intravenous fluid replacement,including potassium. If the colon is increasing in size or is initially larger than 5.5 cm thena laparotomy should be considered to remove the colon to prevent perforation. If not, thesteroids should be continued until the symptoms resolve, and diagnostic procedures suchas colonoscopy and biopsy can be carried out safely. Sulphasalazine or mesalazine areused in the chronic maintenance treatment of ulcerative colitis after resolution of theacute attack.In this case, the colon steadily enlarged despite fluid replacement and other appropriatetreatment. She required surgery with a total colectomy and ileo-rectal anastomosis. Thehistology confirmed ulcerative colitis. The ileorectal anastomosis will be reviewed regu-larly; there is an increased risk of rectal carcinoma.
166Bloody diarrhoea implies serious colonic pathology.It is important to monitor colonic dilatation carefully in colitis, and vital to operatebefore rupture.Both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis can cause a similar picture of active colitis
-----
A 32-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with a 3-day history of failing vision, a reducedurinary output and ankle swelling. Four months earlier she had developed headaches whichwere generalized, throbbing and not relieved by simple analgesics. She does not smoke ordrink alcohol; she is married with three children aged 8, 6 and 2 years. Her husband worksfor a travel firm which requires him to be absent frequently from home.Two months before admission she consulted her general practitioner (GP) for the headaches;tension headaches were diagnosed and codeine phosphate prescribed. This gave no relief,and 3 weeks later she saw her GP again, and the analgesia was changed to a codeine-containing compound analgesic.Her symptoms continued unchanged until 3 days before admission when the headachesbecame worse, her vision became blurred and during the 24 h before admission she notedoliguria and ankle swelling. She presented at the emergency department.The only other relevant medical history is the development of hypertension during the lasttrimester of her third pregnancy which was treated with rest and an antihypertensive.Delivery was spontaneous at term, and the antihypertensive drug was discontinued post-partum. The patient had not attended any postnatal clinics and her blood pressure had notbeen measured at the consultations for her headache.

She is conscious and seems well, but pale and clinically anaemic. There is slight ankleoedema. The blood pressure is 190/140 mmHg, and the jugular venous pressure is not raised.Otherwise her chest, heart and abdomen are normal. In the CNS, examination of the fundishows papilloedema, retinal haemorrhages and exudates in both eyes. Visual acuity isreduced.
167
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 84 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 8.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 200/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 5.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 22 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 22 

 64This woman has accelerated hypertension, defined by the retinal papilloedema (grade IVretinopathy), and renal failure. At this stage it is not clear whether the renal failure is chronic,acute, or a mixture of acute on chronic.Accelerated hypertension can occur as the initial phase of hypertension or as a develop-ment in chronic hypertension, and can be a feature of either primary (essential) or sec-ondary hypertension. In this case it may have been superimposed on hypertension afterthe birth of her third baby, but the information is not available.
168The immediate management is to:lower the blood pressure at a gradual rate over 24 h. Rapid reduction to normalfigures can be extremely dangerous as the sudden change can precipitate arterialthrombosis and infarction in the brain, heart and kidneys and occasionally otherorgans. The details of the treatment will vary; either oral or intravenousantihypertensive drugs may be used.control the fluid intake according to fluid loss (urine plus insensible losses) andobserve closely for the development of pulmonary oedema. Should that developthen dialysis will be urgently required as she will not respond to diuretics owing tothe renal failure.Management!
The important question with regard to the renal failure is whether this is developing in kid-neys chronically damaged by hypertension or some other undiagnosed renal disease, andhow much of it is reversible. Renal ultrasound, which is swift and non-invasive, will givean accurate assessment of kidney size. In this case they were reduced at 8 cm, and end-stage renal failure followed. The impaired visual acuity recovered completely. It is possiblethat a window of opportunity to treat her hypertension at an earlier stage was lost whenshe presented with the headaches but her blood pressure was not measured; acceleratedhypertension can destroy kidney function in a matter of days or weeks.Accelerated hypertension was previously called malignant hypertension because before thedevelopment of effective antihypertensive drugs its mortality approached 100 per cent. Thisis no longer the case, and, furthermore, it gives patients the unfortunate and false impres-sion that they have a form of cancer. The term should therefore no longer be used.Intrapartum hypertension must be followed up as it may indicate underlying renal dis-ease and the beginning of chronic hypertension, primary or secondary.Patients with headache must always have their blood pressure checked.Avoid the term ‘malignant hypertension’
-----
A normally healthy man aged 28 years developed an acute sore throat for which he con-sulted his general practitioner (GP). A diagnosis of acute pharyngitis was made, presumedstreptococcal, and oral penicillin was prescribed. The sore throat gradually improved, but5 days later the patient noted a rash on his arms, legs and face, and painful ulceration ofhis lips and mouth. These symptoms rapidly worsened, he felt very unwell and presentedto the emergency department. There was no relevant previous medical history or familyhistory. He has had sore throats occasionally in the past but they have settled with throatsweets from the chemist.

He looked ill and had a temperature of 39. There were erythematous tender noduleson his arms, legs and face, and ulcers with some necrosis of the lips and buccal and pha-ryngeal mucosae. The rest of the examination was normal.
169
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 14 

 65The diagnosis is acute drug hypersensitivity causing severe erythema multiforme(Stevens–Johnson) syndrome. The pointers to this diagnosis are the rapidity of onset andits timing related to starting the penicillin, antibiotics being the commonest group of drugscausing this syndrome, and the form and distribution of the lesions. The chest X-ray shownis normal.
170!Streptococcal (presumed) infection spreading to the soft tissues; this is much lesscommon in young healthy patients compared to the elderly; its distribution wouldbe diffuse rather than discrete lesions, and was excluded by negative culture of thelesions.Acute leukaemia or neutropenia can present with mucosal ulceration, but notthese skin lesions, and these diagnoses are excluded by the blood count and film.Differential diagnoses of the rash
Drugs other than penicillin should be considered as a cause, e. analgesics for the orig-inal painful throat. The patient had taken a few doses of paracetamol, leaving the penicillinas the likeliest candidate by far as the cause.Management consists of:stoppingthe penicillin and substituting an alternative antibiotic if required: cultureswere negative in this case at this stagea short course of steroids, e. 30 mg prednisolone daily for 5 days to reduce theinflammationobserve for secondary infection of the ulcersanalgesiawarn the patient not to take penicillin or related drugs in the futurerecord the penicillin allergy clearly in GP and hospital notes.Management!
A drug history is an essential part of every patient’s history.Always consider drugs as a cause of complications during a patient’s illness.Drug allergies should be recorded prominently in medical notes
-----
A 37-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) with a 5-day story of urinaryfrequency, dysuria and urethral discharge. In the previous 24 h he had become unwell, feel-ing feverish and with a painful right knee. He works in an international bank and frequentlytravels to Asia and Australia, from where he had last returned 2 weeks ago. There is no rel-evant past or family history and he takes no medication.

He looks unwell, and has a temperature of 38. His heart rate is 90/min, blood pressure124/82 mmHg. Otherwise examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal andnervous systems is normal. His right knee is swollen, slightly tender, and there is a small effu-sion with slight limitation of flexion. There is no skin rash and no oral mucosal abnormality.He has a cream-coloured urethral discharge.
171
NormalHaemoglobin 17.7 g/dLWhite cell count 16.1X-ray of the right knee 

 66The patient has acute gonorrhoea and gonococcal arthritis. The X-ray of the knee is nor-mal. The diagnosis is made by microscopy of the discharge, which should show Gram-positive diplococci, and culture of an urethral swab. The swab should be inoculated ontofresh appropriate medium straight away and kept at 37°C until arrival at the laboratory.Immediate treatment on clinical grounds with ciprofloxacin is indicated; penicillin shouldbe reserved for gonorrhoea with known penicillin sensitivity, to prevent the developmentof resistant strains. Septic monoarthritis is a complication of gonorrhoea; other metastaticinfectious complications are skin lesions and, rarely, perihepatitis, bacterial endocarditisand meningitis.The patient disclosed that he had had unprotected sexual intercourse with prostitutes inThailand and Singapore; he had had no intercourse following return to the UK so no fol-low-up of contacts was necessary. For advice on precautions and investigation for othersexually transmitted diseases he was referred to the sexually transmitted diseases (STD)clinic.
172All students and doctors should be confident in eliciting a sexual history.Accurate sexual histories are more likely when the patient feels confidence and empathywith the interviewer.Contact tracing is an important element of management of sexually transmitted disease This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 48-year-old woman presented to her general practitioner (GP) with 3 months’ history ofback pain in the mid-thoracic region. The pain was intermittent, worse at night, and relievedby ibuprofen, which she bought herself. She had no other symptoms, and no relevant pastor family history. She had never smoked, and drank 10–12 units of alcohol most weeks. Sheworked part-time stacking the shelves in a supermarket and was a very active and compet-itive tennis and badminton player.

She looked well. She indicated that the pain was over the vertebrae of T5/6, but there wasno tenderness, swelling or deformity. Her spinal movements were normal.Her blood pressure was 136/76 mmHg. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdomen exam-ination were normal.
Spinal X-ray was arranged and showed no abnormality. The full blood count, urea creati-nine and electrolytes, calcium, alkaline phosphatase and phosphate were all normal, aswas urine testing.She was advised that the pain was musculoskeletal due to exertion at work and sport, andshe was prescribed diclofenac for the pain. She was advised to rest from her tennis andbadminton.After a few weeks of improvement, the pain began to get worse, being more severe andoccurring for longer periods and seriously disturbing her sleep. She returned to her GP andexamination was as before except that there was now some tenderness over her mid-thoracic spine Lateral X-ray of the thoracicspine 

 67The X-ray shows collapse of the T6 vertebra. If there is nothing to suggest osteoporosis ortrauma then the commonest cause of this is a tumour metastasis. The tumours that mostfrequently metastasize to bone are carcinoma of the lung, prostate, thyroid, kidney, andbreast. 

 of the patient’s breasts, not done before the X-ray result, revealed a firmmass 1–1.5 cm diameter in the tail of the left breast. Urgent biopsy confirmed a carcinomaand she was referred to an oncologist for further management.The common lesions affecting the lumbosacral and cervical spine, e. inflammation ofligaments and other soft tissues and lesions of the intervertebral discs, are much less com-mon in the thoracic spine, and bony metastases should be considered as a cause of per-sistent pain in the thoracic spine in patients of an appropriate age.Review of the first X-ray after the lesion was seen on the second film still failed to iden-tify a lesion, emphasizing the need to repeat an investigation if there is sufficient clinicalsuspicion of an abnormality, even if an earlier investigation is normal.

 of the breasts in women should be part of the routine examination, particu-larly after the age of 40 years, when carcinoma of the breast becomes common.
176Pain in the thoracic vertebrae should raise the possibility of bony metastases in patientsover the age of 40 years.Repeating previously normal or negative investigations is an important part of a patient’smanagement when clinical diagnoses remain unconfirmed
-----
A 66-year-old farmer is referred to a dermatologist for a lesion on his forearm.5 cm in diameter, with an irregular margin and a slightly ulcerated centre. It is painlessand has appeared over the last 6–8 months. Fifteen years earlier the patient had had acadaveric renal transplant for renal failure due to chronic glomerulonephritis caused byimmunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy. This has functioned well, and he has required con-tinuous immunosuppression. Originally this was with prednisolone and azathioprine, butlater it was converted to ciclosporin. His only other medication is propranalol for hyper-tension which he has taken for 20 years. There is no other relevant past or family history.He has never smoked, and drinks 3–6 units of alcohol per week.

The lesion is as described on the right forearm and there are several solar hyperkeratoseson his cheeks, forehead and scalp (he is bald). The blood pressure is 144/82 mmHg. No otherabnormalities are found apart from the transplant kidney in the right iliac fossa.
177
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 4.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 356/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 141 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 29 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 6.7 mmol/LCreatinine 118/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5 

 68The description of the lesion has the characteristic features of a carcinoma of the skin.The risk factors are his age, the many years exposure to sunlight as farmer, and the chronicimmunosuppression. There is an increased risk of several different types of malignancy inpatients on chronic immunosuppression, and skin cancer is now well recognized as a fre-quent complication of chronic immunosuppression unless preventative measures are used.With improving survival rates for transplant patients in general, there is a potential increasein the incidence and prevalence of skin malignancy. Patients on long-term immunosuppres-sion for whatever reason should be strongly advised to avoid direct exposure to sunlight asmuch as possible, and certainly not to sunbathe, and to use high-factor barrier creams. Theyshould cover their skin in the lighter months (April to September inclusive in the northernhemisphere) – no shorts, sleeveless tops or shirts, and a hat to protect the scalp and forehead.This is particularly irksome but even more important for children and young adults whohave a potentially longer period of exposure to sunlight ahead of them. The damage causedto skin by sunlight is cumulative and irreversible, and when transplanted at the age of 50years this patient had already had over 30 years’ occupational exposure to ultraviolet radi-ation. His immunosuppression needs to continue and should be kept at as low a dose as iscompatible with preventing rejection of his transplant.The diagnosis of the lesion was made by biopsy, which showed a squamous cell cancer. Thiswas treated by wide excision and skin grafting. An essential part of the follow-up is regularreview, at least 6-monthly, of the skin to detect any recurrence, any new lesions or malig-nant transformation of the solar hyperkeratoses.
178Ultraviolet radiation is a cumulative risk factor for skin cancer.Preventative measures to reduce exposure to sunlight are an important part of the man-agement of patients on long-term immunosuppression
-----
A 58-year-old woman consults her general practitioner (GP) with a 2-month history ofintermittent dull central epigastric pain. It has no clear relationship to eating and no radi-ation. Her appetite is normal, she has no nausea or vomiting and she has not lost weight.Her bowel habit is normal and unchanged. There is no relevant past or family history. Shehas never smoked, and drinks alcohol very rarely. She has worked all her life as an infantschool teacher. Physical examination at this time was completely normal, with a blood pres-sure of 128/72 mmHg. Investigations showed normal full blood count, urea, creatinine andelectrolytes, and liver function tests.An H2antagonist was prescribed and follow-up advised if her symptoms did not resolve.There was slight relief at first, but after 1 month the pain became more frequent andsevere, and the patient noticed that it was relieved by sitting forward. It had also begunto radiate through to the back. Despite the progressive symptoms she and her husbandwent on a 2-week holiday to Scandinavia which had been booked long before. During thesecond week her husband remarked that her eyes had become slightly yellow, and a fewdays later she noticed that her urine had become dark and her stools pale. On return fromholiday she was referred to a gastroenterologist.

She was found to have yellow sclerae with a slight yellow tinge to the skin. There was nolymphadenopathy and her back was normal. As before her heart, chest and abdomen werenormal.
179
Haemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 280/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 140 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 111/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 69The patient has an obstructive jaundiceas indicated by the history of dark urine and palestools and the liver function tests. The pain has two typical features of carcinoma of thepancreas: relief by sitting forward and radiation to the back. An alternative diagnosiscould be gallstones but the pain is not typical.As with obstruction of any part of the body the objective is to define the site of obstruc-tion and its cause. The initial investigation was an abdominal ultrasound which showed adilated intrahepatic biliary tree, common bile duct and gallbladder but no gallstones. Thepancreas appeared normal, but it is not always sensitive to this examination owing to itsdepth within the body.Further investigation of the region at the entrance of the common bile duct into the duode-num and head of the pancreas was indicated and was undertaken by computed tomography(CT) scan. It showed a small tumour in the head of the pancreas causing obstruction to thecommon bile duct, but no extension outside the pancreas. No abdominal lymphadenopathywas seen. No hepatic metastases were seen on this investigation or on the ultrasound.The patient underwent partial pancreatectomy with anastamosis of the pancreatic duct tothe duodenum. The jaundice was rapidly relieved. Follow-up is necessary not only todetect any recurrence but also to treat any possible development of diabetes.
180Carcinoma of the pancreas can present with non-specific symptoms in its early stages.It is an important cause of obstructive jaundice.Patients who have had a partial removal of the pancreas are at risk of diabetes
-----
A 24-year-old woman is attending her regular Sunday church service. During the singingof a hymn she suddenly fell to the ground without any loss of consciousness and told theother members of the congregation who rushed to her aid that she had a complete par-alysis of her left leg. She was unable to stand and was taken by ambulance to the emer-gency department. She has no other neurological symptoms and is otherwise healthy. Shehas no relevant past or family history, is on no medication and has never smoked or drunkalcohol. She works as a sales assistant in a bookshop and until recently lived in a flat witha partner of 3 years’ standing until they split up 4 weeks previously. She has moved backin with her parents.

She looks well, and is in no distress; making light of her condition with the staff. The onlyabnormalities are in the nervous system. She is completely orientated and the Mini-mentalState score is normal. The cranial nerves and the neurology of the upper limbs and rightleg are normal. The left leg is completely still during the examination, and the patient isunable to move it on request. Tone is normal; co-ordination could not be tested becauseof the paralysis. Superficial sensation was completely absent below the margin of the leftbuttock and the left groin, with a clear transition to normal above this circumference atthe top of the left leg. Vibration and joint position sense were completely absent in the leftleg. There was normal withdrawal of the leg to nociceptive stimuli such as firm strokingof the sole and increasing compression of Achilles’ tendon. The superficial reflexes andtendon reflexes were normal and the plantar response was flexor 

 70This patient has hysteria, now renamed as dissociative disorder. The clues to this are thecluster of:the bizarre complex of neurological symptoms and signs which do not fit neuroanatom-ical principles, e. the reflex responses and withdrawal to stimuli despite the paralysisthe patient’s lack of concern, known by the French term of ‘la belle indifference’the onset in relation to stress, i. the loss of her partnersecondary gain: removing herself from the parental home which is a painful reminderof her splitting from her partner.None of these on its own is specific for the diagnosis but put together they are typical. Inany case of dissociative disorder the diagnosis is one of exclusion; in this case the neuro-logical examination excludes organic lesions. It is important to realize that this disorder isdistinct from malingering and factitious disease. The condition is real to patients and theymust not be told that they are faking illness or wasting the time of staff.The management is to explain the dissociation – in this case it is between her will to moveher leg and its failure to respond – as being due to stress, and that there is no underlyingserious disease such as multiple sclerosis. A very positive attitude that she will recover isessential, and it is important to reinforce this with appropriate physical treatment, in thiscase physiotherapy.The prognosis in cases of recent onset is good, and this patient made a complete recoveryin 8 days.Dissociative disorder frequently presents with neurological symptoms, and the commonestof these are convulsions, blindness, pain and amnesia. Clearly some of these will requirefull neurological investigation to exclude organic disease.
182Dissociative disorder frequently presents as a neurological illness.The diagnosis of dissociative disorder must be one of exclusion
-----
A 72-year-old woman develops a chest infection and is treated at home with doxycyclineby her general practitioner (GP). She lives alone but one of her daughters, a retired nurse,moves in to look after her. The patient has a long history of rheumatoid arthritis which isstill active and for which she has taken 7 mg of prednisolone daily for 9 years. She takesparacetamol occasionally for joint pain. There is no other relevant past or family history.When the GP visited he found the blood pressure to be 138/82 mmHg.For 5 days since 2 days before starting the antibiotics she has been feverish, anorexic andconfined to bed. Her daughter has made her drink plenty of fluids. On the fifth day shebecame drowsy and her daughter had increasing difficulty in rousing her, so she called anambulance to take her to the emergency department.

She is small (assessed as 50 kg) but there is no evidence of recent weight loss. Her temper-ature is 38. She is drowsy and responds to commands, but will not answer simple ques-tions. There is a global reduction in muscle tone but no focal neurological signs. Her pulseis 118/min, blood pressure 104/68 mmHg and the jugular venous pressure is not raised.There is no ankle swelling. In the chest there are bilateral basal crackles and wheezes. Herjoints show slight active inflammation and deformity, in keeping with the history ofrheumatoid arthritis.
183
NormalHaemoglobin 11.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 13.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 376/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 125 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 131/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 71The likeliest diagnosis is secondary acute hypoaldosteronismdue to failure of the hypo-thalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis caused by the long-term prednisolone. This is a commonproblem in patients on long-term steroids and arises when there is a need for increasedglucocorticoid output, most frequently seen in infections or trauma, including surgery, orwhen the patient has prolonged vomiting and therefore cannot take the oral steroid effect-ively. It presents as here with drowsiness and low blood pressure.The hyponatraemia is another result of the superimposed illness. It is probably due to acombination of reduced intake of sodium owing to the anorexia, and dilution of plasmaby the fluid intake. In secondary hypoaldosteronism the renin–angiotensin–aldosteronesystem is intact and should operate to retain sodium. This is in contrast to acute primaryhypoaldosternism (Addisonian crisis) when the mineralocorticoid secretion fails as well asthe glucocorticoid secretion, causing hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia. Acute secondaryhypoaldosteronism is often but erroneously called an Addisonian crisis.Spread of the infection should also be considered, the prime sites being to the brain, witheither meningitis or cerebral abscess, or locally to cause a pulmonary abscess or empyema.The patient has a degree of immunosuppression due to her age and the long-term steroid.The dose of steroid is higher than may appear at first sight as the patient is only 50 kg;drug doses are usually quoted for a 70 kg male, which in this case would equate to 10 mgof prednisolone, i. an increase of 40 per cent on her dose of 7 mg.The treatment is immediate empirical intravenous infusion of hydrocortisone and saline.The patient responded and in 5 h her consciousness level was normal and her blood pres-sure had risen to 136/78 mmHg. Chest X-ray showed bilateral shadowing consistent withpneumonia, but no other abnormality.
184Secondary hypoaldosteronism is a medical emergency and requires immediate empir-ical treatment.Patients on long-term steroids should have the dose increased when they have intercur-rent illnesses, and replaced systemically when they have persistent vomiting
-----
A 38-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a 2-h history of severeabdominal pain. The pain is in the right loin and radiates to the right flank and groin andthe right side of the vulva. It is colicky and has made her vomit several times. Since the ageof 18 years she has had recurrent urinary tract infections, mainly with dysuria and fre-quency, but she has had at least four episodes of acute pyelonephritis affecting right and leftkidneys separately and together. She has not had gross haematuria nor passed stones perurethra. There is no other past history. Her mother had frequent urinary tract infections anddied at the age of 61 of a stroke. Over the years the patient has taken irregular intermittentprophylactic antibiotics, but for only approximately a total of 20 per cent of the time. Sheworks in a travelling fairground and has no general practitioner (GP). Access to any previ-ous medical records is not possible as she cannot remember the details of where she was seenor treated. She has had some imaging of the urinary tract but is unsure of the details of theinvestigations and their results.

She is ill – flushed and sweating with a pyrexia of 39. Her heart and chest are normal.She is tender in the right loin. The blood pressure is 150/100 mmHg and funduscopy showsarteriovenous nipping.
185
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 18.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 365/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 136 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 5.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 20 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 16 

 72The pain’s acute onset, colicky nature and radiation are typical of ureteric colic, the like-liest cause of which is a stone. Renal stones can cause infection, or chronic infection cancause scarring which provides a nidus for stone formation.The high fever and leucocytosis indicate that she has another episode of acute pyelonephritis.The patient is in renal failure; at this stage it is not clear whether this is all acute, with previ-ous normal renal function, or whether there is underlying chronic renal failure with an acuteexacerbation. Both kidneys are affected, as renal function remains normal if one kidney ishealthy. Until proved otherwise it must be assumed that any element of acute renal failure isdue to obstruction by a stone; her illness is too short for significant prerenal failure due tofluid loss or septicaemia. Acute pyelonephritis per secan cause acute renal failure but this isvery uncommon.She has hypertension. Her blood pressure is raised, but pain and anxiety could easily accountfor that. However, there is grade I retinopathy.The overall interpretation at this point is that she is a medical emergency with acutepyelonephritis in an obstructed urinary tract.The most important investigation now is an ultrasound of the urinary tract. This showsstones in both kidneys; the left kidney is reduced in size to 10 cm, with a scar at its upperpole, and is not obstructed; the right kidney is larger at 11 cm but is obstructed as shownby a dilated renal pelvis and ureter; its true size would be less than 11 cm.The immediate management is an intravenous antibiotic to treat Gram-negative bacteria, E. colibeing the commonest cause of urinary tract infections, after urine and blood samplesare taken for culture. Intravenous fluids should be given (she has vomited) according to fluidbalance, carefully observing urine output.The obstruction must be relieved without delay; the method of choice is percutaneousnephrostomy and drainage. In this procedure a catheter is inserted under imaging guidancethrough the right loin into the obstructed renal pelvis. Not only will this relieve the obstruc-tion but it allows the later injection of X-ray contrast to define the exact site of obstruction(percutaneous nephrostogram). This was done 48 h later and showed hold-up of the contrastat the vesico-ureteric junction, a typical place for a stone to lodge. The patient passed thestone shortly afterwards, as often happens if it is small enough; otherwise it would have tobe removed surgically. Her fever, pain and leucocytosis rapidly resolved. Her renal functionimproved but stabilized at a creatinine of 180/H9262mol/L, i. she has chronic renal failure.Blood biochemistry revealed no underlying abnormality to cause the stones: calcium,phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and uric acid were normal. The probable cause of herrenal disease is reflux nephropathy because of her sex, history of recurrent infections andthe scar on the left kidney. There is a familial tendency for this disease, and her mothermay have had it. The patient’s children should be screened for it in infancy.Long-term management comprises prophylactic antibiotics, immediate treatment of acuteurinary infections, control of hypertension and regular measurement of renal function.These should be supervised from a fixed base, despite the patient’s peripatetic existence.
186An obstructed and infected urinary system is an emergency requiring immediate treatment.Prophylactic treatment of recurrent urinary tract infections should be considered inevery case, although not necessarily indicated in every one
-----
A 25-year-old female accountant complains of shortness of breath, cough and chest pain.The chest pain came on suddenly 6 h previously when she was walking to work. It was asharp pain in the right side of the chest. The pain was made worse by breathing. It settledover the next few hours but there is still a mild ache in the right side on deep breathing.She felt a little short of breath for the first hour or two after the pain came on but nowonly feels this on stairs or walking quickly. She has had a dry cough throughout the 6 h.She smokes 15 cigarettes a day and drinks 10 units of alcohol a week. She uses marijuanaoccasionally. She is on no medication. Four years ago something very similar happened;she is not sure but thinks that the pain was on the left side of the chest on that occasion.There is no relevant family history.

She is not distressed or cyanosed. Her pulse is 88/min and blood pressure 128/78 mmHg, res-piratory rate is 20/min. Heart sounds are normal. In the respiratory system the trachea andapex beat are not displaced. Expansion seems normal, as is percussion. There is decreasedtactile vocal fremitus and the intensity of the breath sounds is reduced over the right side ofthe chest. There are no added sounds on auscultation 

 73The chest X-ray shows a large right pneumothorax. There is a suggestion of a bullouslesion at the apex of the right lung. Pneumothoraces are usually visible on normal inspira-tory films but an expiratory film may help when there is doubt. There is no mediastinaldisplacement on examination or X-ray, movement of the mediastinum away from the sideof the pneumothorax would suggest a tension pneumothorax. Although she had symp-toms initially, these have settled down as might be expected in a fit patient with no under-lying lung disease. A rim of air greater than 2 cm around the lung on the X-ray indicatesat least a moderate pneumothorax because of the three-dimensional structure of the lungwithin the thoracic cage represented on the two-dimensional X-ray.The differential diagnosis of chest pain in a young woman includes pneumonia and pleurisy,pulmonary embolism and musculoskeletal problems. However, the clinical signs and X-rayleave no doubt about the diagnosis in this woman. Pneumothoraces are more common intall, thin men, in smokers and in those with underlying lung disease. Further investigationssuch as computed tomography (CT) scan are not indicated unless there is a suggestion ofunderlying lung disease.There is a suggestion that she may have had a similar episode in the past but it may havebeen on the left side. There is a tendency for recurrence of pneumothoraces, about 20 percent after one event and 50 per cent after two. Because of this, pleurodesis should be con-sidered after two pneumothoraces or in professional divers or pilots.The immediate management is to aspirate the pneumothorax through the second inter-costal space anteriorly using a cannula of 16 French gauge or more, at least 3 cm long. Smallpneumothoraces with no symptoms and no underlying lung disease can be left to absorbspontaneously but this is quite a slow process. Up to 2500 mL can be aspirated at one time,stopping if it becomes difficult to aspirate or the patient coughs excessively. If the aspir-ation is unsuccessful or the pneumothorax recurs immediately, intercostal drainage to anunderwater seal or valve may be indicated. Difficulties at this stage or a persistent air leakmay require thoracic surgical intervention. This is considered earlier than it used to besince the adoption of less invasive video-assisted techniques. In this woman the apicalbulla was associated with a persistent leak and required surgical intervention throughvideo-assisted minimally invasive surgery.Marijuana has been reported to be associated with bullous lung disease, and she should beadvised to avoid it. Tobacco smoking increases the risk of recurrence of pneumothorax.
188The patient should not be allowed to fly for at least 1 week after the pneumothorax hasresolved with full expansion of the lung (2 weeks after a traumatic pneumothorax).The risk of recurrence will be reduced by stopping smoking
-----
An 86-year-old man has been in a residential home for 3 years since his wife died. He wasunable to look after himself at home because of some osteoarthritis in the hips limiting hismobility. Apart from his reduced mobility, which has restricted him to a few steps on aframe, and a rather irritable temper when he doesn’t get his own way, he has had no prob-lems in residential care.However, he has become much more difficult over the last 36 h. He has accused the staffof assaulting him and stealing his money. He has been trying to get out of his bed and hischair, and this has resulted in a number of falls. On some occasions his speech has beendifficult to understand. He has become incontinent of urine over the last 24 h. Prior to thishe had only been incontinent on one or two occasions in the last 6 months.The duty doctor is called to see him and finds that he is rather sleepy. When roused heseems frightened and verbally aggressive. He thinks that there is a conspiracy in the wardand that the staff are having secret meetings and planning to harm him. He is disorien-tated in place and time although reluctant to try to answer these questions.He is a non-smoker and drinks 1–2 units a month. On a routine blood test 8 years ago hewas diagnosed with hypothyroidism and thyroxine 100 mg daily is the only medication heis taking. The staff say that he has taken this regularly up to the last 36 h and his recordsshow that his thyroid function was normal when it was checked 6 months earlier.The staff say that he is now too difficult to manage in the residential home. They feel thathe has dementia and that the home is not an appropriate place for such patients.

There is nothing abnormal to find apart from blood pressure of 178/102 mmHg and limi-tation of hip movement with pain and a little discomfort in the right loin.
189
NormalThyroxine 125 nmol/L 70–140 nmol/LThyroid-stimulating hormone 1.0 mU/LBlood glucose 6 

 74This is not the picture of dementia. The acute onset with clouding of consciousness, hal-lucinations, delusions, restlessness and disorientation suggest an acute confusional state,delirium. There are many causes of this state in the elderly. It can be provoked by drugs,infections, metabolic or endocrine disorders, or other underlying conditions in the heart,lungs, brain or abdomen.There is no record of any drugs except thyroxine, although this should be rechecked to ruleout any analgesics or other agents that he might have had access to or that might not beregarded as important.The thyroid abnormality is not likely to be relevant. The lack of replacement for 2 dayswill not have a significant effect and the normal results 6 months earlier make this anunlikely cause of his current problem. The sugar is normal. Other metabolic causes suchas renal failure, anaemia, hyponatraemia and hypercalcaemia need to be excluded.The falls raise the possibility of trauma, and a subdural haematoma could present in thisway. However, it seems that the falls were a secondary phenomenon. The most likely causeis that he has a urinary tract infection. There is blood and protein in the urine, he has becomeincontinent and he has some tenderness in the loin which could fit with pyelonephritis. Weare not told whether he had a fever, and the white cell count should be measured.If this does seem the likely diagnosis it would be best to treat him where he is, if this is safeand possible. He is likely to be more confused by a move to a new environment in hospi-tal. There is every likelihood that he will return to his previous state if the urinary tractinfection is confirmed and treated appropriately, although this may take longer than theresponse in temperature and white cell count. Treatment should be started on the pre-sumption of a urinary tract infection, while the diagnosis is confirmed by microscopy andculture of the urine. The most likely organism isEscherichia coli, and an antibiotic suchas trimethoprim would be appropriate, although resistance is possible and advice of thelocal microbiologist may be helpful. From the confusion point of view he should be treatedcalmly, consistently and without confrontation. If medication is necessary, small doses ofa neuroleptic such as haloperidol or olanzapine would be appropriate.
190Acute changes in mental state need to be explained even in the elderly with baselinemental problems.In delirium, consciousness is clouded, disorientation is usual and delusions maydevelop. The onset is acute. In dementia, there is an acquired global impairment ofintellect, memory and personality, but consciousness is typically clear
-----
A 21-year-old man is brought in to hospital at 5 pm. He was found unconscious in his flatby his girlfriend. She had last seen him at 8 pm the evening before when they came homeafter Christmas shopping. When she came to see him the next afternoon she found himunconscious on the floor of the bathroom. He had been well previously, with no knownmedical history. There was a family history of diabetes mellitus in his father and one ofhis two brothers.His girlfriend had said that he had shown no signs of unusual mood on the previous day.He had his end of term examinations in psychology coming up in 1 week and was anx-ious about these but his studies seemed to be going well and there had been no problemswith previous examinations.He is a non-smoker. He drinks around 10 units of alcohol most weeks with occasionalbinges. He has taken ecstasy tablets in the past but has never used intravenous drugs.

He looked pale. There were no marks of recent intravenous injections. His pulse was92/min, blood pressure 114/74 mmHg, respiratory rate 22/min. There were no abnormalitiesto find in the cardiovascular or respiratory systems. In the nervous system there was noresponse to verbal commands. Appropriate withdrawal movements were made in responseto pain. The reflexes were brisk and symmetrical, plantars were downgoing. The pupilswere dilated but responsive to light. In the fundi, the optic discs appeared swollen 

 75This young man has been brought in unconscious having been well less than 24 h previ-ously. The most likely diagnoses are related to drugs or a neurological event. The first partof the care should be to ensure that he is stable from a cardiac and respiratory point of view.His respiratory rate is a little high. Blood gases should be measured to monitor the oxy-genation and ensure that the carbon dioxide level is not high, suggesting hypoventilation.The family history of diabetes raises the possibility that his problem is related to this.However, the speed of onset makes hyperglycaemic coma unlikely. One would expect aslower development with a history of thirst and polyuria over the last day or so. However,the blood sugar should certainly be checked. Hypoglycaemia comes on faster but wouldnot occur as a new event in diabetes mellitus. It might occur as a manifestation of a rarecondition such as an insulinoma. Other metabolic causes of coma such as abnormal levelsof sodium or calcium should be checked.A neurological problem such as a subarachnoid haemorrhage is possible as a suddenunexpected event in a young person. Where the level of consciousness is so affected, somelocalizing signs or subhyaloid haemorrhage in the fundi might be expected. If no othercause is evident from the initial investigations, a computed tomography (CT) scan mightbe indicated.The most likely cause is that the loss of consciousness is drug related. Despite the lack ofany warning of intent beforehand, drug overdose is common and the question of avail-ability of any medication should be explored further. This would be likely to be a sedativedrug. If there is any suspicion of this then levels of other drugs which might need treat-ment should be measured, e. aspirin and paracetamol.The other possibility in somebody brought in unconscious is that they are suffering fromcarbon monoxide poisoning. The fact that it is winter and he was found in the bathroomwhere a faulty gas-fired heater might be situated increases this possibility. Patients withcarbon monoxide poisoning are usually pale rather than the traditional cherry-red colourassociated with carboxyhaemoglobin. Papilloedema can occur in severe carbon monoxidepoisoning and might account for the swollen appearance of the optic discs on funduscopy.Measurement of carboxyhaemoglobin showed a level of 32 per cent. He was treated with highlevels of inspired oxygen and made a slow but full recovery over the next 48 h. Mannitol forcerebral oedema and hyperbaric oxygen are considerations in the management. The problemwas traced to a faulty gas water heater which had not been serviced for 4 years.
192Drug overdose is the commonest cause of unconsciousness in young people, but otherdiagnoses must always be considered.Carboxyhaemoglobin levels should be measured in patients found unconscious indoorsor in vehicles and after known exposure to smoke.In carbon monoxide poisoning marked hypoxia may be present in the absence ofcyanosis
-----
A 24-year-old man presents to an emergency department complaining of a severeheadache. The headache started 24 h previously and has rapidly become more intense. Hedescribes the headache as generalized in his head. He has vomited twice and appears to bedeveloping drowsiness and confusion. He finds bright lights uncomfortable. There is nosignificant previous medical history or history of allergy. He smokes 10 cigarettes per dayand drinks 24 units of alcohol per week. He is not taking any medication currently. He isa graduate student doing an MA in psychology. He lives with his female partner and theyhave two children aged 3 and 4 years.

He looks flushed and unwell. His temperature is 39. He has stiffness on passive flexionof his neck. There is no rash. His sinuses are not tender and his eardrums appear normal.His pulse rate is 120/min and blood pressure 98/74 mmHg. 

 of heart, chest andabdomen are normal. His conscious level is decreased but he is rousable to command andthere are no focal neurological signs. His fundi are normal.
193
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 17.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 322/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 131 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 176/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5.0 mmol/LBlood cultures results awaitedChest X-ray: normalElectrocardiogram (ECG): sinus tachycardiaComputed tomography (CT) of brain: normalLumbar puncture turbid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)Leucocytes/H110228000/mL/H110215/mLCSF protein 1.4 g/LCSF glucose 0 

 76This patient has bacterial meningitis. He has presented with sudden onset of severe headache,vomiting, confusion, photophobia and neck stiffness. The presence of hypotension, leucocy-tosis and renal impairment suggest acute bacterial infection rather than viral meningitis. Themost likely causative bacteria are Neisseria meningitidis,Haemophilus influenzaeandStreptococcus pneumonia. In patients in this age group Streptococcus pneumonia orNeisseriameningitidisare the most likely organisms. Meningococcal meningitis (Neisseria meningi-tidis) is usually associated with a generalized vasculitic rash.The most severe headaches are experienced in meningitis, subarachnoid haemorrhage andclassic migraine. Meningitis and subarachnoid haemorrhage present as single episodes ofheadaches. Meningitis usually presents over hours, whereas subarachnoid haemorrhageusually presents very suddenly. Fundoscopy in patients with subarachnoid haemorrhagemay show subhyaloid haemorrhage. Meningeal irritation can be seen in many acutefebrile conditions particularly in children. Local infections of the neck/spine may causeneck stiffness. Other causes of meningitis include viral, fungal, cryptococcal and tubercu-lous meningitis which can be distinguished by analysis of the CSF.When meningitis is suspected appropriate antibioic treatment should be started even beforethe diagnosis is confirmed. In the absence of a history of significant penicillin allergy themost common treatment would be intravenous ceftriaxone or cefotaxime.Patients with no papilloedema or lateralizing neurological signs that suggest a space-occupying lesion should be lumbar punctured immediately (even before a CT scan isobtained). If there are localized neurological signs it is essential to perform a CT scan firstto avoid the dangers of coning which can occur when a lumbar puncture is performed inthe presence of raised intracranial pressure.The combination of /H110221000 neutrophils/mL CSF, a CSF glucose/H1102140 per cent of the simul-taneous blood level and a CSF protein 1.4 g/L is strongly suggestive of bacterial meningi-tis. The Gram stain and culture will give the definitive diagnosis. In this case, the Gramstain demonstrated Gram-positive cocci consistent with Streptococcus pneumoniainfec-tion. Intravenous antibiotics must be started immediately. The patient must be nursed in amanner appropriate for the decreased conscious level. Adequate analgesia with opiatesshould be given. The patient has mild hyponatraemia due to the syndrome of inappropri-ate antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, and fluid losses should be treated with normalsaline. Inotropes may be needed to treat hypotension.The two children aged 3 and 4 years must be considered. It is not clear from the historywho is looking after them. They should be examined, and if meningococcal meningitis issuspected or the organism is uncertain they should be given prophylactic treatment withrifampicin and vaccinated against meningococcal meningitis.
194Bacterial meningitis causes severe headache, neck stiffness, drowsiness and photophobia.The main differential diagnoses are subarachnoid haemorrhage and migraine.When bacterial meningitis is strongly suspected antibiotic treatment should be startedbefore bacteriological confirmation is available
-----
A 70-year-old woman has been complaining of upper abdominal pain which has increasedover the last 3 days. It has been a general ache in the upper abdomen and there have beensome more severe waves of pain. She has vomited three times in the last 24 h. On two orthree occasions in the past 5 years she has had a more severe pain in the right upperabdomen. This has sometimes been associated with feeling as if she had a fever and she wastreated with antibiotics on one occasion. Her appetite is generally good but she has been offher food over the last week. She has not lost any weight. There have been no urinary orbowel problems but she does say that her urine may have been darker than usual for a fewdays and she thinks the problem may be a urinary infection.In her previous medical history she has had hypothyroidism and is on replacement thy-roxine. She has annual blood tests to check on the dose; the last test was 3 months ago.She has had some episodes of chest pain on exercise once or twice a week for 6 monthsand has been given atenolol 50 mg daily and a glyceryl trinitrate spray to use sublinguallyas needed.

Her sclerae are yellow. Her pulse is 56/min and regular. Her blood pressure is 122/80 mmHg.There are no abnormalities in the cardiovascular system or respiratory system. She is tenderin the right upper abdomen and there is marked pain when feeling for the liver during inspir-ation. No masses are palpable in the abdomen. She is clinically euthyroid.
195
NormalSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 110/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1.45 mmol/LTotal bilirubin 83 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 840 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 57 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 434 IU/L 11–51 IU/LThyroid-stimulating hormone 2 

 77This woman has a 5-year history of intermittent upper abdominal pain. Her current painhas lasted longer than previous episodes and on examination she is jaundiced. The acutepain on inspiration while palpating in the right upper quadrant is a positive Murphy’s signof inflammation of the gallbladder. The relative bradycardia in the presence of the acuteillness is likely to be related to the beta-blocker therapy (atenolol) rather than hypothy-roidism or any other problem. The dark urine would fit with increased conjugated biliru-bin because of obstruction. The conjugated bilirubin is water soluble and excreted in theurine. Without conjugated bilirubin entering the bowel one would expect pale stools.Her investigations show a raised bilirubin. The alanine aminotransferase is slightly raisedbut the main abnormalities in the liver enzymes are high values of alkaline phosphataseand gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. This is the pattern of obstructive jaundicewhichcan be caused by mechanical obstruction by tumour or by gallstones, or by adverse effectsof some drugs, e. phenothiazines, flucloxacillin. The drugs she is taking are not likelycauses of liver problems.The previous episodes of pain and fever over the last 5 years are likely to have been chole-cystitis secondary to gallstones. If the gallbladder were to be palpable on examination thiswould suggest an alternative diagnosis of malignant obstruction, since by this time theseprevious episodes of cholecystitis would usually have caused scarring and contraction ofthe gallbladder. In order to produce obstructive jaundice one or more of her gallstones musthave moved out of the gallbladder and impacted in the common bile duct. Migration ofgallstones from the gallbladder occurs in around 15 per cent of cases.Her thyroid condition seems to be stable and not relevant to the current problem. Her anginais indicative of coronary artery disease and needs to be considered when treatment is beingplanned for her gallstones. An electrocardiogram (ECG) should be part of her management.Only a minority of gallstones are radio-opaque and visible on a plain radiograph so thenext investigation should be an ultrasound of the liver and biliary tract. Ultrasound willshow dilatation of the biliary tree but is not so reliable for identifying common bile ductstones. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is the best tool for this,and sphincterotomy with or without stone retrieval may be possible to remove stonesobstructing the common bile duct.
196Obstructive jaundice with a dilated, palpable gallbladder is likely to be caused by carcinomaat the head of the pancreas (Courvoisier’s sign).Obstructive jaundice causes preferential elevation of alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase.When the main rise is in alanine aminotransferase, this indicates primarily hepatocellulardamage
-----
A 36-year-old man presents to his general practitioner (GP) complaining of a fever andgeneralized aching in muscles around the back and legs. At first he thought that this wasprobably influenza but the symptoms have now been present for 9 or 10 days. For 3 dayshe had diarrhoea but this has settled now. He has complained of a sore mouth over the lastweek or so which has made it difficult to eat, but he has not felt very hungry during thistime and thinks he may have lost a few kilograms in weight. Around the time that thesymptoms started he noticed a mild erythematous rash over his chest and abdomen butthis has faded.He has visited the practice occasionally in the past for minor complaints. He has been tothe practice to obtain vaccinations for visits to Vietnam and Thailand over the last 3 years.His last travel abroad was 3 months ago. He smokes 10 cigarettes daily, drinks 20–30 unitsof alcohol weekly and takes no illicit drugs. He had no other relevant medical or family his-tory. He works as a solicitor. He is single and lives alone. He has had a number of hetero-sexual and homosexual relationships in the past. Twelve months ago he had an HIV testwhich was negative.

He had a temperature of 38°C. Pulse rate was 94/min, respiratory rate 16/min and bloodpressure 124/78 mmHg. There were no abnormalities in the cardiovascular or respiratorysystem. On examination of the mouth there were two ulcers in the oral mucosa, 5–10 mmin diameter. There were a number of palpable cervical lymph nodes on both sides of theneck, which were a little tender. There were no other nodes and no enlargement of liveror spleen. There were no rashes on the skin.
197
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 7.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 5.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 2.8/H11003109/LPlatelets 332/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 144 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 73/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 13 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 121 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 25 IU/L 5–35 IU/LScreening test for glandular fever: negative
QuestionSuggest some possible diagnoses 

 78This seems likely to be an infective problem which has gone on for over a week. Thelength of the history makes influenza unlikely. The other positive features are the cervicallymphadenopathy and the oral ulceration. The temperature is still up and there has beena rash which has resolved. The blood results are all normal including the test for glandu-lar fever (infectious mononucleosis) which was a reasonable diagnosis with these features.The previous homosexual contact increases the possibility of sexually transmitted infec-tions. It is possible that travel to Vietnam and Thailand may have been associated withhigh-risk sexual exposure. He is known to have had a negative HIV test 12 months ago.However, it is quite possible that this might be an HIV seroconversion illness. In aroundhalf of those who acquire the virus this occurs within 4–6 weeks of acquisition. Althoughthe HIV test will still be negative, this can be diagnosed by finding the presence of the HIVvirus or its p24 antigen in the blood. He should have been counselled about precautionsto reduce the risk of transmission of sexually transmitted diseases at the time of the HIVtesting 12 months before.The picture might fit for secondary syphilis which occurs 6–8 weeks after the primarylesion. However, in that case the rash would often be more extensive and the lymph nodesare not usually tender. A serological test for syphilis should certainly be performed.Other viral illnesses are possible. Hepatitis may present with this more general prodrome butthe normal liver function tests make this much less likely. Lymphoma can present with lym-phadenopathy and fever but the oral ulceration and the rash are not typical of lymphoma. Ifthe serological tests proved negative, lymph node biopsy might be considered.In this case, tests for an HIV viraemia were positive. Antiretroviral treatment at the timeof known or high-risk exposure is useful in reducing the risk of infection. At this stage,treatment is supportive with explanation and arrangements for monitoring of viral load.
198A seroconversion illness occurs in around 50 per cent of those acquiring HIV infection.The severity varies.In cases of known or high-risk exposure, such as needlestick injuries, an immediatecourse of antiretroviral treatment is often indicated. Immediate advice should be sought
-----
A 79-year-old woman is brought to hospital by her daughter because of increasing con-fusion. This has developed over the last 3 weeks and prior to this her daughter says thatshe had normal cognitive function. She also complains of loss of her appetite, headacheand muscle cramps. She had hypertension diagnosed 5 years ago and was on treatmentwith atenolol but this was stopped 2 months ago because she complained of cold handsand feet. Her medication was changed to bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg once a day and shehas had no problems with these tablets. She lives on her own with her daughter nearby.She neither drinks alcohol nor smokes. She is on no other medication although she takesvitamins that she buys from the chemist.

Her skin turgor is normal. Her pulse is 80/min regular, blood pressure 146/90 mmHg, jugu-lar venous pressure normal, heart sounds normal with no peripheral oedema. Respiratoryand abdominal systems are normal. Her abbreviated mental test score is 6/10 with disorien-tation in time and place. There is no focal neurology. Funduscopy shows silver-wiring andarteriovenous nipping but no papilloedema.
199
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 172/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 113 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 64/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5 

 79This woman’s confusion is due to hyponatraemia. There are many causes of confusion inthe elderly but the very low sodium level of 113 mmol/L in this case is an adequateexplanation. Her serum is profoundly hypo-osmolar. In her case, osmolality can be calcu-lated from the following equation:2/H11003([Na/H11001]/H11001[K/H11001])/H11001[urea]/H11001[glucose]/H11005241 mosmol/kg (normal range:278–305 mosmol/kg).Hyponatraemia may be asymptomatic, but when it falls rapidly or reaches very low levels(below 120 mosmol/kg) it can cause confusion, anorexia, cramps, fits and coma. Hypo-natraemia is associated with hypovolaemia when there is excess loss of fluid and sodium(sweating, burns, diarrhoea and vomiting), or when there is renal loss of sodium and water(diuretic use, Addison’s disease).Hyponatraemia with hypervolaemia occurs when there is excess retention of water.Normally, the dilutional fall in plasma osmolality suppresses arginine vasopressin (AVP,antidiuretic hormone) secretion which allows excretion of excess water. In congestive car-diac failure and cirrhosis with ascites, baroreceptors register reduced perfusion causing AVPsecretion, but in most other cases of hyponatraemia there is an inability to suppress AVPsecretion normally. In rare cases of primary polydipsia, the huge water intake may over-whelm this mechanism, and in severe renal failure the kidneys cannot excrete a water load.The syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) occurs in relationto malignancy, neurological disorders or pneumonia. Circulating volume is usually normal.Normovolaemia with hyponatraemia also occurs after administration of too much intra-venous hypotonic fluid and in hypothyroidism.The low plasma sodium, potassium and urea in this patient are consistent with water excess.Measurement of urinary sodium and osmolality is useful. In primary polydipsia the urinecan be maximally diluted to/H11021100 mosmol/kg, whereas in states with excess AVP the urineosmolality is usually/H11022320 mosmol/kg while plasma osmolality is low. Urinary sodium isusually/H1102125 mmol/L in hypovolaemic states, but/H1102240 mmol/L in SIADH where patients arenormovolaemic and the rate of sodium excretion depends on dietary intake and taking ofdiuretics. Diuretic-induced hyponatraemia tends to occur within a few weeks of startingtreatment, and occurs mainly in elderly women often concurrently on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) which inhibit water excretion. The clinical and biochemicalpicture in this woman is consistent with diuretic-induced hyponatraemia.
200Low plasma osmolality with high urinary osmolality suggests excess ADH production.Volume depletion with urinary sodium/H1102220 mmol/L suggests water and sodium lossthrough the kidneys (renal failure, diuretic use, Addison’s disease).Volume depletion and low urinary sodium (/H1102120 mmol/L) suggests volume and sodiumloss extrarenally, e. vomiting, diarrhoea, sweating
-----
A 38-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a painful left calf. Shehad woken that morning to notice that her calf was swollen and found it painful to put herfoot to the ground. There was no history of recent air travel or long-distance car journeys.She is otherwise well, is not breathless and has no chest pain. She has had no previousmedical illnesses other than some cartilage problems in the knees. In her obstetric historyshe has had two first-trimester miscarriages and has not had any successful pregnancies.There is no family history of note. The patient is married. She is a teacher of physical edu-cation and exercises regularly. She neither smokes tobacco nor drinks alcohol. The oralcontraceptive is the only medication that she takes.

She is a little overweight. Her left leg is clearly swollen, with a 4 cm difference in circum-ference around the left calf measured 10 cm below the tibial tuberosity. There is tendernesson palpation of the calf. The left calf is slightly warmer than the right. There is a small effu-sion in the right knee, which is not hot or painful. There is some pitting oedema in the leftankle and there are superficial veins evident in the left leg. Physical examination is other-wise normal.
201
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 7.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 328/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 141 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 111/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 80The most likely clinical diagnosis in this patient is a left deep vein thrombosis(DVT). Themain differential diagnoses of an acutely swollen leg are a ruptured Baker’s cyst, traumaand acute cellulitis. Other causes of chronically swollen legs are obesity, lymphoedema,congestive cardiac failure and previous DVTs (postphlebitic). The knee cartilage problemsraise the possibility of ruptured Baker’s cyst, and the active lifestyle is compatible withmuscle trauma such as a ruptured plantaris but there is no story of an acute onset.The raised D-dimers are not helpful since there are many causes. D-dimers are helpfulwhen negative in making the diagnosis of DVT much less likely. The history of miscarriageand the raised activated partial thrombopastin time suggest the presence of antiphospho-lipid syndrome (lupus anticoagulant) which should be investigated together with serologicaltests for systemic lupus erythematosus.
202In assessing the clinical likelihood of a deep vein thrombosis scoring systems areavailable:Active cancer 1 pointParalysis or recent plaster immobilization 1 pointMajor surgery or confined to bed for/H110223 days in last 4 weeks 1 pointLocal tenderness along venous system 1 pointSwelling of entire leg 1 pointCalf/H110223 cm larger than other side 1 pointCollateral superficial veins 1 pointOedema greater than in contralateral leg 1 pointAlternative diagnosis as or more likely than DVT –2 pointsPretest clinical probability0 or less/H11005low1–2/H11005intermediate/H110222/H11005highThis patient has a score of 3.Scoring system for DVT diagnosis!
Dehydration, prolonged inactivity, bedrest, post-surgical, obesity.Malignancy: cancers of the lung, pancreas, breast, prostate and gut are particularlyassociated. Pelvic malignancy causing compression can directly lead to venousthrombosis.Oral contraceptives: oestrogens increase the risk.Genetic causes: protein C/S deficiency, antithrombin III deficiency, homocystinuriaand factor V Leiden mutation.Behçet’s syndrome: a diagnostic triad of iritis, orogenital ulceration and DVTs.Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.Major risk factors for DVTs!
When a patient presenting with a DVT is young, or where there is no obvious underlyingcause or where there is a strong family history or a history of recurrent events, underly-ing risk factors should be investigated. This woman had oral contraceptive use and thepresence of antiphospholipid antibodies as risk factors for her DVT. Antiphospholipid anti-bodiesmay be present as part of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or may be an isolated finding, primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Although the antibodies prolongthe activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) they predispose to thrombosis. Recurrent miscarriages, as in this patient, may be a feature. Patients may present with idiopathicrecurrent DVT, arterial gangrene, livedo reticularis, cerebral infarcts, chorea and multi-infarct dementia.Doppler ultrasound of her leg veins will confirm the diagnosis of DVT. A thrombophiliascreen should be sent. Lupus serology should also be performed to define if the antiphos-pholipid antibodies are part of SLE in this patient.This patient should be immediately anticoagulated either with intravenous heparin or sub-cutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin to prevent proximal propagation of the thrombusand pulmonary emboli. The patient should be started on warfarin. Patients with antiphos-pholipid antibodies require lifelong anticoagulation and consultation with a haematologistto prevent further thrombotic events.
203Young patients with venous thromboses should be investigated for underlying causes.Patients with antiphospholipid antibodies require lifelong anticoagulation.Clinical diagnosis of a deep vein thrombosis is insensitive and has poor specificity This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 38-year-old man has a 2-month history of abdominal pain. The pain is epigastric or cen-tral and is intermittent. He had a similar episode a year before. On that occasion he tooksome indigestion mixture obtained from a retail pharmacy, and the symptoms resolvedafter 10 weeks. The pain usually lasts for 30–60 min. It often occurs at night, when it canwake him up, and seems to improve after meals. Some foods such as curries and other spicyfoods seem to bring on the pain on occasions.He has smoked 10–15 cigarettes per day for 25 years and drinks around 30 units of alco-hol each week. He is not taking any medication at present. There is no other relevant med-ical history. He works as a financial broker in the City. He has been feeling more tiredrecently and had put this down to pressure of work. A blood count was sent.

There is mild tenderness in the epigastrium, but no other abnormalities.
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLRed cell count 6.4/H110031012/L 4.9/H110031012/LMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 71 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 8.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 350/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LIron 4 mmol/L 14–31 mmol/LTotal iron-binding capacity 76 mmol/L 45–70 mmol/LFerritin 6 mg/L 20–300 mg/LThe blood film is reported as showing microcytic, hypochromic red cells 

 81The blood count shows anaemia with a low MCV indicating a microcytic anaemia. Thehigh red cell count with low haemoglobin shows that the haemoglobin content of the cellsis reduced. The low serum iron and ferritin with a high total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)confirm that this is related to true iron deficiency. The blood film confirms that the cellsare microcytic and low in haemoglobin (hypochromasia). In anaemia of chronic diseasethe cells may be microcytic and serum iron low but the TIBC would be low also and fer-ritin normal. The diagnosis is most likely to be a peptic ulcer.The commonest cause of iron-deficiency anaemia in a man is gastrointestinal blood loss. Ina premenopausal woman menstrual blood loss would be the most common cause. Theabdominal pains would be consistent with those from a peptic ulcer, especially a duodenalulcer when there is more often some relief from food. The diagnosis should be establishedby endoscopy because alternative diagnoses such as carcinoma of the stomach cannot beruled out from the history. The site of the blood loss causing the iron deficiency should beestablished. At the same time the presence of Helicobacter pylorishould be investigated.In this case, an endoscopy confirmed an active duodenal ulcer and samples were positiveforHelicobacter pylori. This is associated with gastritis and with over 90 per cent of duo-denal ulcers. Tests of expired breath and serum antibodies are alternative diagnostic tests. pyloriwas treated by a combined regime of omeprazole for 6 weeks and triple ther-apy with lansoprazole, amoxicillin and clarithromycin for 7 days. He was given strongrecommendations to stop smoking and to address his excessive alcohol consumption. Theiron deficiency was corrected by additional oral iron which was continued for 3 monthsto replenish the iron stores in the bone marrow. Repeat endoscopy to show healing con-firms the original diagnosis of benign ulceration.
206Various antibiotic regimes have been shown to temporarily remove Helicobacter pyloriand prevent or postpone recurrence of symptoms and ulceration.Replenishment of iron stores in the bone marrow needs 3 months’ treatment with oraliron after the haemoglobin has returned to normal.Ferritin is an acute-phase protein and will be raised in the presence of acute illness evenin the presence of iron deficiency
-----
A 76-year-old woman has felt non-specifically unwell for about 10 weeks. She feels stiffespecially when she gets up in the morning. She struggles to get out of bed by herself andshe has difficulty lifting her hand to comb her hair. She has also noticed some pain in herknees and fingers. She has lost 4 kg in weight, and has noticed some sweats which seem tooccur at night. She has come to see her general practitioner (GP) because a new problemhas arisen. For the last few days she has had a constant severe headache. On direct ques-tioning she says that she has had pain in her jaw when chewing. She has previously beenfit with no significant past medical history. She lives alone. She has not smoked for 40years and she only drinks alcohol at Christmas. She is taking no regular medication. Shehas tried some paracetamol but this has not helped the headache. She is markedly tender to palpation over parts of her scalp. Her blood pressureis 138/84 mmHg. 

 of her cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal systems isnormal. Power is slightly reduced in the proximal muscles of her arms and legs. Neurologicalexamination is otherwise normal.
207
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 12.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 377/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LErythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 91 mm/h/H1102110 mm/hSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 102/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 6 

 82This woman has the typical clinical symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica/giant cell arteritis.Most patients are over 65 years. The onset of symptoms is often sudden. Patients may pres-ent primarily with polymyalgia-type symptoms (proximal muscle pain and stiffness mostmarked in the mornings) or temporal arteritis symptoms (severe headaches with tendernessover the arteries involved). Patients may have systemic symptoms such as general malaise,weight loss and night sweats. Characteristically, the ESR is very elevated (at least 40 mm/h)and there is a mild anaemia and leucocytosis. The liver enzymes are often slightly raised. Inpolymyalgia, the main symptoms are muscle stiffness and pain which may simulate muscleweakness. The creatine kinase is normal, unlike in polymyositis.The diagnosis of polymyalgia rheumatica is essentially a clinical diagnosis. A very elevatedESR is useful. Around 25 per cent of patients with giant cell arteritis have polymyalgia.When there are headaches and giant cell arteritis is suspected, a temporal artery biopsyshould be performed. However, the histology may be normal because the vessel involve-ment with inflammation is patchy. Nevertheless, a positive result provides reassuranceabout the diagnosis and the need for long-term steroids.This patient has clear evidence of giant cell arteritis (also known as temporal arteritisalthough other vessels are involved), and is at risk of irreversible visual loss either due toischaemic damage to the ciliary arteries causing optic neuritis, or central retinal arteryocclusion. The patient should immediately be started on high-dose prednisolone (before thebiopsy result is available). The steroid dose should be slowly tapered according to clinicalfeatures and ESR, but is likely to need to be continued for around 2 years. Bone protectionmeasures should be part of the management.
208!PolymyositisSystemic vasculitisSystemic lupus erythematosusParkinsonismHypothyroidism/hyperthyroidismOsteomalaciaDifferential diagnoses of proximal muscle weakness and stiffness
Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis often co-exist.Patients with these conditions have markedly elevated ESR levels.There is a risk of blindness in giant cell arteritis, and steroids should be started immediately
-----
A 76-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of an episode ofweakness in her right arm and leg. She was sitting down with her husband when the weak-ness came on and her husband noticed that she slurred her speech. All of the symptomsresolved within 10 min. Her husband has noticed two to three episodes of slurred speech last-ing a few minutes over the last 6 months but had thought nothing of it. Two months earliershe had a sensation of darkness coming down over her left eye and lasting for a few minutes.She has had type 2 diabetes mellitus for 6 years, controlled on diet. She is hypertensive andsuffered a myocardial infarction 3 years previously. She smokes about 10 cigarettes per dayand drinks alcohol rarely. Her only medication is enalapril for her blood pressure.

She looks frail. Her pulse rate is 88/min irregular and blood pressure 172/94 mmHg. The apexbeat is displaced to the sixth intercostal space, mid-axillary line. Her heart sounds are normaland a grade 3/6 pansystolic murmur is audible. A soft bruit is audible on auscultation overthe left carotid artery. Her dorsalis pedis pulses are not palpable bilaterally and her posteriortibial is weak on the left and absent on the right. 

 of her chest and abdomen isnormal. Neurological examination demonstrates normal tone, power and reflexes. There is nosensory loss. Funduscopy is normal.
209
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 7.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 242/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 86/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 5.0 mmol/LHaemoglobin A1c(HbA1c) 7 

 83This woman gives a history of transient neurological symptoms with no residual signs. She isat increased risk of cerebrovascular disease because of her smoking, hypertension and dia-betes. She is describing recurrent transient ischaemic attacks(TIAs) which by definitionresolve completely in less than 24 h, and, in practice, often much quicker. Two months beforeher admission she had an episode of amaurosis fugax (transient uniocular blindness) whichis often described as like a shutter coming down over the visual field of one eye. The TIAs areaffecting the left cerebral hemisphere in the area of brain supplied by the left carotid arterycausing right-sided weakness and dysarthria. TIAs may be caused by thromboembolism fromulcerated plaques in the carotid arteries or aortic arch, from cardiac sources such as a dilatedleft atrium, and more rarely due to haematological causes such as polycythaemia rubra vera,sickle cell disease or hyperviscosity due to myeloma. The symptoms may be the same eachtime or vary. Her ECG shows atrial fibrillation and she has the signs of mitral regurgitationwith a pansystolic murmur and displaced apex beat. There are three obvious potential sourcesfor emboli:a left carotid artery stenosis (in a correct location to account for the distribution ofthese TIAs and more likely in the presence of a carotid bruit)the left atrium in atrial fibrillation with clinically evident mitral regurgitationa previous myocardial infarction with mural thrombosis.
210Migraine: the aura of migraine is a spreading and slowly intensifying phenomenonand the symptoms are usually positive, e. The aura is usually followedby a severe headache. However, migraines can be associated with focal neurologicaldeficits, e.Focal epilepsy: this also normally causes positive symptoms such as twitching andsensory symptoms which may march up one limb and from one limb to another onthe same side.Syncope: unlike most TIAs there is loss of consciousness but there are usually nofocal signs. Dizziness often precedes the attack.Space-occupying lesion: a cerebral tumour or abscess can produce fluctuatingsymptoms and signs. The symptoms are usually more gradual in onset and areoften associated with headaches or personality changes.Miscellaneous: hysteria, cervical spondylosis, hypoglycaemia and cataplexy.Major causes of transient neurological syndromes!
This patient should be investigated with a computed tomography (CT) of the head to excludea structural space-occupying lesion, echocardiography to assess left-atrial size, the mitralvalve (to exclude infective valvular vegetations) and to rule out thrombus in the left ven-tricle related to the previous infarct, and a Doppler ultrasound of the carotid arteries. If acritical carotid stenosis (/H1102270 per cent) is present, carotid endarterectomy should be consid-ered. The patient should be anticoagulated with warfarin because of her atrial fibrillationand carotid stenosis. Her blood pressure and diabetes should be carefully controlled and herlipids measured and treated if appropriate.Most transient ischaemic attacks persist for only a few minutes.Approximately 40 per cent of patients with cerebral infarction have a prior history oftransient ischaemic attacks.Multiple risk factors need to be taken in to account in the investigation and managementof vascular disease
-----
A 32-year-old man presents to the emergency department at 2 am rather inebriated. He hadbeen to an end of examinations party that evening, followed by a Chinese meal. He beganto feel unwell around 11.45 pm and vomited twice, brought up his meal and several pintsof lager and initially felt better. Over the next hour or so he retched violently on severaloccasions and around 1 am vomited up bright red blood. He says that he noticed just asmall amount of blood on the first occasion but considerably more the second time.There is no relevant previous medical history or family history. He smokes 10 cigarettes aday, takes occasional marijuana and drinks 2–3 units of alcohol a week.

He seems a little drunk. There is some dried blood around his mouth. The pulse is 102/minand the blood pressure 134/80 mmHg lying, with no change on standing and no otherabnormalities in the cardiovascular or respiratory system. In the abdomen there is a littletenderness in the epigastrium.
211
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 8.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 315/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.0 mmol/LChloride 99 mmol/L 95–105 mmol/LUrea 5 

 84The most likely diagnosis is a tear of the mucosa in the lower oesophagus or upper stom-ach causing haematemesis (a Mallory–Weiss lesion). This is produced from the mechan-ical trauma of violent vomiting or retching. In this case, it may have been triggered by anunaccustomed large alcohol intake.The estimation of blood loss is often difficult from the patient’s story. Haematemesis is afrightening symptom and the amount may be overestimated. The haemoglobin level hereis normal and it is unlikely to be helpful in an acute bleed. If it were low at this stage itwould be more likely to imply chronic blood loss. The first signs of significant blood losswould be likely to be tachycardia and a postural drop in blood pressure. His pulse is fastbut this may well be related to anxiety.Other possible causes of haematemesis are gastritis or peptic ulcer. The story of retching andvomiting of gastric contents with no blood on several occasions before the haematemesis ischaracteristic of Mallory–Weiss syndrome. This is usually a benign condition which does notneed intervention. Definitive diagnosis requires upper gastrointestinal endoscopy but is notalways necessary in a typical case. Occasionally the blood loss is more substantial or thesplit in the wall may be deeper than just the mucosa, leading to perforation.Management in this case was with careful observation, intravenous fluid to replace lostvolume from vomiting. Blood was taken for blood grouping in case of more substantialhaemorrhage but transfusion was not necessary. He was treated with an anti-emetic and anH2-blocker. The vomiting settled and there was no more bleeding. He decided to indulgeless at future parties.
212A history of violent retching or vomiting without blood before haematemesis suggests anupper gastrointestinal mucosal tear.It is difficult to be sure of the degree of blood loss in haematemesis because the patientwill find it difficult to quantitate the volume of blood, and the amount of blood still inthe gastrointestinal tract is unknown.In some surveys alcohol is linked directly to around one-quarter of acute medicaladmissions
-----
A 33-year-old housewife has noticed that she is becoming tired and having difficulty cop-ing with her two children, aged 6 and 4 years. She goes to see her general practitioner (GP)because she feels she may be suffering from anxiety and depression. She says that she hasfelt more irritable and anxious than usual. Her sleep is normal. Her appetite has been nor-mal but she has lost some weight. Her change in personality has been noticed by her hus-band and friends. She feels constantly restless and has difficulty concentrating on a subjectfor more than a few moments. Her increased anxiety has developed over the past 3 months.She has also noticed an increased frequency of bowel movements. Her periods have becomelighter and shorter. She feels extremely tired, and thinks that she has been prone to sweatmore than usual. She has had no significant illnesses previously. She is a non-smoker anddrinks 10 units of alcohol per week.

She appears agitated and her hands are sweaty and tremulous. Her pulse is 104 and regular,her blood pressure 130/70 mmHg. Her proximal muscles seem a little weak. There are noabnormalities in the cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal or nervous systems. Investigationsare organized by her GP.
213
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLWhite cell count 4.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 246/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 142 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.0 mmol/LBicarbonate 22 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrea 5.7 mmol/LCreatinine 78/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 4 

 85Although anxiety might produce some of these symptoms and signs, they fit much betterwith a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. The neck should be examined carefully and in this casethere was a smooth goitre with no bruit over it. Blood tests showed a very low thyroxine-stimulating hormone (TSH) level and a high free thyroxine (T4), confirming the diagnosis ofhyperthyroidism due to a diffuse toxic goitre (Graves’ disease). Hyperthyroidism may mimican anxiety neurosis with marked restlessness, irritability and distraction. The most helpfuldiscriminatory symptoms are weight loss despite a normal appetite and preference for coldweather. The most helpful signs are goitre, especially with a bruit audible over it, resting sinustachycardia or atrial fibrillation, tremor and eye signs. Eye signs which may be presentinclude lid retraction (sclera visible below the upper lid), lid lag, proptosis, oedema of the eye-lids, congestion of the conjunctiva and ophthalmoplegia. Atypical presentations of thyrotox-icosis include atrial fibrillation in younger patients, unexplained weight loss, proximalmyopathy or a toxic confusional state. The weakness here is suggestive of a proximal myopa-thy. The very low TSH level indicates a primary thyroid disease rather than overproduction ofTSH by the anterior pituitary.
214Diffuse toxic goitre (Graves’ disease)Toxic nodular goitremultinodular goitre (Plummer’s disease)solitary toxic adenomaOver-replacement with thyroxineCommon causes of hyperthyroidism!Blood should be sent for thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin which will be detected inpatients with Graves’ disease. Medical treatment for thyrotoxicosis involves the use of theantithyroid drugs carbimazole or propylthiouracil. These are given for 12–18 months butthere is a 50 per cent chance of disease recurrence on stopping the drugs. If this happensradioiodine or surgery is indicated. Beta-blockers can be used to rapidly improve the symp-toms of sympathetic overactivity (tachycardia, tremor) while waiting for the antithyroiddrugs to act. Radio-iodine is effective but there is a high incidence of late hypothyroidism.Surgery is indicated if medical treatment fails, or if the gland is large and compressing sur-rounding structures. In severe exophthalmos there is a risk of corneal damage and ophthal-mological advice should be sought. High-dose steroids, lateral tarsorrhaphy or orbitaldecompression may be needed.Thyrotoxicosis may be difficult to differentiate from an anxiety state.The commonest causes of hyperthyroidism are Graves’ disease or a toxic nodular goitre
-----
A 48-year-old man presents to the emergency department with weakness of his legs. Fourweeks earlier he had symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection. Four days beforeadmission he had a feeling that there was something wrong in his feet, and 3 days beforeadmission he started to develop some difficulty in walking. Now he says that he is hardlyable to move his legs below his knees. Both feet have also become painful over the last dayor so. His bowels and bladder are functioning normally. He has no significant past medicalhistory. He neither smokes nor drinks alcohol and is taking no medication.

He looks well but is anxious. His pulse rate is 104/min, and blood pressure 162/98 mmHg.His jugular venous pressure is not raised and examination of his heart, respiratory andabdominal systems is normal. Neurological examination shows grade 1/5 power below hisknees and 2/5 power for hip flexion/extension. The tone in his legs is reduced. Knee andankle reflex jerks are absent. There is impaired pinprick sensation up to the thighs andreduced joint position sense and vibration sense in the ankles. Neurological examinationof his arms is normal.
215
Initial haematology and biochemistry results are normal.A lumbar puncture is performed with the following results:NormalCerebrospinal fluid (CSF): clearPressure 170 mm CSF/H11021200 mm CSFCSF protein 3.4 g/LCSF glucose 4 mmol/L/H1102270 per cent plasma glucoseLeucocytes 5/mL/H110215/mLPlasma glucose 4 

 86The most marked feature is the loss of power. The reduced tone and absent reflexes indi-cate that this is a lower motor neurone lesion. The sensory disturbance is less severe andhe has a sensory level around L2/3. This man has Guillain–Barré syndrome(acute idio-pathic inflammatory polyneuropathy). This disorder is a polyneuropathy which developsusually over 2–3 weeks, but sometimes more rapidly. It commonly follows a viral infec-tion or Campylobactergastroenteritis, and a fever is common. It predominantly causes amotor neuropathy which can either have a proximal, distal or generalized distribution.Distal paraesthesiae and sensory loss are common. Reflexes are lost early. Cranial and bulbarnerve paralysis may occur and can cause respiratory failure. The CSF protein is usuallyraised, but the cell count is usually normal, although there may be a mild lymphocytosis.The disorder is probably due to a cell-mediated delayed hypersensitivity reaction causingmyelin to be stripped off the axons by mononuclear cells.
216!Guillain–Barré syndromeLead poisoningDiphtheriaCharcot–Marie–Tooth disease (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy)PoliomyelitisDifferential diagnoses of motor neuropathy
An acute-onset neuropathy suggests:Guillain–Barré syndromeporphyriamalignancysome toxic neuropathiesdiphtheriabotulism.This patient should be referred to a neurologist for further investigation and management. Inthis patient who presents with weakness and sensory signs, it is important to make sure there isno evidence of spinal cord compression or multiple sclerosis. However, these would tend tocause hypertonia, hyper-reflexia and a more distinct sensory level. A magnetic resonance imag-ing (MRI) scan of the brain and spinal cord should therefore be considered. Nerve-conductionstudies will confirm a neuropathy. He should be treated either with plasma exchange or intra-venous immunoglobulin. His respiratory function should be monitored with daily spirometry,and mechanical ventilation may be necessary. Most patients recover over a period of severalweeks.Guillain–Barré syndrome presents with predominantly a motor neuropathy althoughsensory symptoms are usually present.There is often a history of an infective illness in the previous 3 weeks, oftenCampylobacter jejuni This page intentionally left blank
-----
An 85-year-old man is admitted to hospital because of a fall in which he has sustained amild facial laceration. In the history it becomes evident that he has had around eight fallsover the last 3 months. He says that the falls have occurred in the morning on most occa-sions but have occasionally occurred in the afternoon. He does not think that he has lostconsciousness although he does remember a sensation of dizziness with the falls. He saysthat the falls have not been associated with any chest pain or palpitations. He does notremember tripping or any other mechanical trigger to the falls. He seems to return to nor-mal within a few minutes of the fall. On two or three occasions he has hurt his knees onfalling, and on one other occasion he hit his head. He lives alone and there have been nowitnesses of any of the falls.He smokes five cigarettes a day and does not drink. He has an occasional cough with somewhite sputum but he cannot remember whether he was coughing at the time of any of thefalls. He was diagnosed as having hypertension at a routine well man clinic 4 years ago,and has been on treatment with a diuretic, bendrofluazide and doxazosin, for this. Theblood pressure has been checked in the surgery on three or four occasions and he was toldthat it has been well controlled. He was found to have a high fasting blood sugar 6 monthsbefore and had been advised a diabetic diet. There is no relevant family history. He workedas a messenger until he retired at the age of 70 years. His pulse is 90/min and irregular. The blood pressure is 134/84 mmHg. Theheart sounds are normal and there is nothing abnormal to find on examination of the respi-ratory system or gastrointestinal system. There are no significant hypertensive changes in thefundi. In the nervous system, there is a little loss of sensation to light touch in the toes, butno other abnormalities.
NormalHaemoglobin 13.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 288/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 138 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 69/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 6 Electrocardiogram 

 87There are a number of possibilities to explain falls in the elderly. Some more information inthe history about the circumstances of these falls would be helpful. On further enquiry, itemerges that the falls are most likely to occur when he gets up from bed first thing in themorning. The afternoon events have occurred on getting up from a chair after his post-lunchdoze. These circumstances suggest a possible diagnosis of postural hypotension. This wasverified by measurements of standing and lying blood pressure – the diagnostic criteria area drop of 15 mmHg on standing for 3 min. This showed a marked postural drop with bloodpressure decreasing from 134/84 to 104/68 mmHg. This is most likely to be caused by theantihypertensive treatment; both the alpha-blocker which causes vasodilatation and thediuretic might contribute. Another possible candidate for a cause of the postural hypoten-sion is the diabetes which could be associated with autonomic neuropathy. In this case thediabetes is not known to have been present for long and there is evidence of only very mildperipheral sensory neuropathy. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy is usually associated withquite severe peripheral sensory neuropathy, with or without motor neuropathy.The ECG shows evidence of sino-atrial node disease or sick sinus syndrome. Clinically, itis easily mistaken for atrial fibrillation because of the irregular rhythm and the variationin strength of beats. The ECG shows a P-wave with each QRS complex although the P-waves change in shape and timing. It may be associated with episodes of bradycardiaand/or tachycardia which could cause falls. This might be investigated further with a 24-hambulatory recording of the ECG.Coughing bouts can cause falls through cough syncope. The positive intrathoracic pressureduring coughing limits venous return to the heart. The cough is usually quite marked and hemight be expected to remember this since he gives a good account of the falls otherwise.Syncope can occur in association with micturition. Neck movements with vertebrobasilardisease, poor eyesight and problems with balance are other common causes of falls in theelderly. A neurological cause, such as transient ischaemic episodes and epilepsy, is less likelywith the lack of prior symptoms and the swift recovery with clear consciousness and no neuro-logical signs.Another diagnosis which should be remembered in older people who fall is a subduralhaematoma. Symptoms may fluctuate, and this might be considered and ruled out with acomputed tomography (CT) scan of the brain.The doxazosin should be stopped and another antihypertensive agent started if necessary.This might be a beta-blocker, long-acting calcium antagonist or angiotensin converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, although all these can cause postural drops in blood pressure. Hissymptoms all disappeared on withdrawal of the doxazosin. The blood pressure rose to144/86 mmHg lying and 142/84 mmHg standing, indicating no significant posturalhypotension, with reasonable blood-pressure control.
220Falls in the elderly are a symptom in need of a diagnosis.Postural hypotension is a common side-effect of diuretics, vasodilators or other anti-hypertensive therapy. Lying and standing blood pressures should be measured if this is suspected.Autonomic neuropathy in diabetes is associated with significant peripheral sensory neuropathy
-----
A 63-year-old woman is brought in to the surgery by her neighbour who has been wor-ried that she looks increasingly unwell. On direct questioning she says that she has feltincreasingly tired for around 2 years. She has been off her food but is unclear whether shehas lost any weight. She was diagnosed with hypothyroidism 8 years ago and has been onthyroxine replacement but has not had her blood tests checked for a few years. Her othercomplaints are of itching for 2–3 months, but she has not noticed any rash. She says thather mouth has been dry and, on direct questioning, thinks her eyes have also felt dry.There has been no disturbance of her bowels or urine although she thinks that her urinehas been rather ‘strong’ lately. She is 14 years postmenopausal. There is a family historyof thyroid disease and of diabetes. She does not smoke, and drinks two glasses of sherryevery weekend. She has never drunk more than this regularly. She has taken occasionalparacetamol for headaches but has been on no regular medication other than thyroxineand some vitamin tablets she buys from the chemist.

Her sclerae look a little yellow and she has xanthelasmata around the eyes. There are someexcoriated marks from scratching over her back and upper arms. The pulse is 74/min andregular, blood pressure is 128/76 mmHg. No abnormalities are found in the cardiovascu-lar or respiratory system. In the abdomen, the liver is not palpable but the spleen is felt2 cm under the left costal margin. It is not tender.
221
NormalSodium 142 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 84/H9262moI/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1.45 mmol/LTotal bilirubin 84 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 494 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 63 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 568 IU/L 11–51 IU/LThyroid stimulating hormone 1.0 mU/LCholesterol 7.8 mmol/L/H110215.5 mmol/LFasting glucose 4 

 88The liver function tests show a predominantly obstructive picture with raised alkalinephosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, while cellular enzymes are only slightlyraised. The symptoms and investigations are characteristic of primary biliary cirrhosis, anuncommon condition found mainly in middle-aged women. In the liver there is chronicinflammation around the small bile ducts in the portal tracts. Hypercholesterolaemia, xan-thelasmata and xanthomata are common. The dry eyes and dry mouth may occur as partof an associated sicca syndrome. Itching occurs because of raised levels of bile salts, andcan be helped by the use of a binding agent such as cholestyramine which interferes withtheir reabsorption. The presence of antimitochondrial antibodies in the blood is typical ofprimary biliary cirrhosis. These antibodies are found in 95 per cent of cases.Hypothyroidism might explain some of her symptoms but the normal thyroid-stimulatinghormone (TSH) level shows that her current dose of 150/H9262g thyroxine is providing adequatereplacement. The thyroid antibodies reflect the autoimmune thyroid disease which is asso-ciated with other autoantibody-linked conditions such as primary biliary cirrhosis.The diagnosis is confirmed by a liver biopsy. This should only be carried out after an ultra-sound confirms that there is no obstruction of larger bile ducts. Ultrasound will help torule out other causes of obstructive jaundice although the clinical picture described hereis typical of primary biliary cirrhosis. No treatment is known to affect the clinical courseof this condition.
222The pattern of liver enzyme abnormalities usually reflects either an obstructive or hepatocellular pattern.Symptoms such as itching have a wide differential diagnosis. Dealing with the under-lying cause, wherever possible, is preferable to symptomatic treatment
-----
A 40-year-old man is admitted to the emergency department having been found uncon-scious at home by his wife on her return from work in the evening. He has suffered frominsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus for 18 years and his diabetic control is poor. He hashad recurrent hypoglycaemic episodes, and has been treated in the emergency departmenton two occasions for this. Over the past few weeks he has developed pain in his right foot.His general practitioner diagnosed cellulitis and he has received two courses of oralantibiotics. This has made him feel unwell and he has complained to his wife of fatigue,anorexia and feeling thirsty. In his medical history he had a myocardial infarction 2 yearsago. He has had bilateral laser treatment for proliferative diabetic retinopathy. He was abuilder but is now unemployed. He smokes 25 cigarettes per week and drinks 30 units ofalcohol per week. His treatment is twice-daily insulin, he checks his blood glucose irregu-larly at home.

He is clinically dehydrated with reduced skin turgor and poor capillary return. His pulseis regular and 116/min. His blood pressure is 92/70 mmHg lying, 72/50 mmHg sitting up.He seems short of breath with a respiratory rate of 30/min. Otherwise, examination of hisrespiratory and abdominal systems is normal. He has an ulcer on the third toe of his rightfoot and the foot looks red and feels warm. He is rousable only to painful stimuli. Thereis no focal neurology. Funduscopy shows bilateral scars of laser therapy.
223
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 16.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 344/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 143 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 5.0 mmol/LChloride 105 mmol/L 95–105 mmol/LUrea 11.7 mmol/LCreatinine 114/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBicarbonate 12 mmol/L 24–30 mmol/LUrinalysis:/H11001/H11001protein;/H11001/H11001ketones;/H11001/H11001/H11001glucoseBlood gases on airpH 7 

 89This man has signs of dehydration and the high urea with a normal creatinine is consistentwith this. The blood glucose level is not given but the picture is likely to rep-resenthyperglycaemic ketoacidotic coma.The key clinical features on examination aredehydration and hyperventilation, and the triggering problem with the infection in thefoot. A persistently high sugar level induced by his infected foot ulcer causes heavy glyco-suria triggering an osmotic diuresis. This leads to hypovolaemia and reduced renal bloodflow causing prerenal uraemia. The extracellular hyperosmolality causes severe cellulardehydration, and loss of water from his brain cells is the cause of his coma. Decreasedinsulin activity with intracellular glucose deficiency stimulates lipolysis and the productionof ketoacids. He has a high anion gap metabolic acidosis due to accumulation of ketoacids(acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate). The anion gap is calculated from the equation:[Na/H11001]/H11001[K/H11001]/H11002([Cl/H11002]/H11001[HCO3/H11002])and is normally 10–18 mmol/L; in this case it is 31. Ketones cause a character-istically sickly sweet smell on the breath of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis (about 20per cent of the population cannot smell the ketones). The metabolic acidosis stimulates therespiratory centre leading to an increase in the rate and depth of respiration (Kussmaulbreathing) producing the reduction in paCO2as respiratory compensation for the acidosis.In older diabetic patients there is often evidence of infection precipitating these metabolicabnormalities, e. bronchopneumonia, infected foot ulcer.The differential diagnosis of coma in diabetics includes non-ketotic hyperglycaemic coma,particularly in elderly diabetics, lactic acidosis especially in patients on metformin, pro-found hypoglycaemia, and non-metabolic causes for coma, e. cerebrovascular attacksand drug overdose. Salicylate poisoning may cause hyperglycaemia, hyperventilation andcoma, but the metabolic picture is usually one of a dominant respiratory alkalosis andmild metabolic acidosis.The aims of management are to correct the massive fluid and electrolyte losses, hypergly-caemia and metabolic acidosis. Rapid fluid replacement with intravenous normal salineand potassium supplements should be started. In patients with cardiac or renal disease, acentral venous pressure (CVP) line is mandatory to control fluid balance. Regular moni-toring of plasma potassium is essential, as it may fall very rapidly as glucose enters cells.Insulin therapy is given by intravenous infusion adjusted according to blood glucose levels.A nasogastric tube is essential to prevent aspiration of gastric contents, and a bladder catheterto measure urine production. Antibiotics and local wound care should be given to treatthis man’s foot ulcer. In the longer-term it is important that this patient and his wife areeducated about his diabetes and that he has regular access to diabetes services. His smok-ing and alcohol consumption will also need to be addressed. There may be social issues tobe considered in relation to his unemployment.
224Dehydration, tachypnoea and ketosis are the key clinical signs of diabetic ketoacidosis.Twenty per cent of the population (and therefore doctors) cannot smell ketones This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 69-year-old widower smoked 20 cigarettes a day for over 40 years but then gave up 9 months ago when his first grandchild was born. He has had a cough with daily sputumproduction for the last 20 years and has become short of breath over the last 3 years. Hecoughs up a little white or yellow sputum every morning. He has put on weight recently andnow weighs 100 kg. His ankles have become swollen recently and his exercise tolerance hasdecreased. He can no longer carry his shopping back from the supermarket 180 m (200yards) away. He worked as a warehouseman until he was 65 and has become frustrated byhis inability to do what he used to do. He is not able to look after his grandchild because hefeels too short of breath.There is no other relevant medical or family history. He lives alone and has a cat and abudgerigar at home.His general practitioner (GP) gave him a salbutamol metered-dose inhaler which producedno improvement in his symptoms.

He is overweight. He appears to be centrally and peripherally cyanosed and has some pit-ting oedema of his ankles. His jugular venous pressure is raised 3 cm. He has poor chestexpansion. There are some early inspiratory crackles at the lung bases.
Respiratory function test results are shown:Actual PredictedFEV1(L) 0.6FER (FEV1/FVC) (%) 41 72–80PEF (L/min) 90 310–440FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; FER, forced expiratoryratio; PEF, peak expiratory flow  

 90The most likely diagnosis is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD). The physicalsigns and chest X-ray indicate overinflation. The early inspiratory crackles are typical ofCOPD.Treatment with bronchodilators should be pursued looking at the effect of /H92522-agonists andanticholinergic agents, judging the effect from the patient’s symptoms and exercise toler-ance rather than spirometry. Theophylline may sometimes be useful as a third-line ther-apy but has more side-effects.With this degree of severity, inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators (sal-meterol/formoterol or tiotropium) would be appropriate inhaled therapy. Careful attentionwould need to be given to inhaler technique.He is cyanosed and has signs of right-sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). Blood gasesshould be checked to see if he might be a candidate for long-term home-oxygen therapy(known to improve survival if the pressure of arterial oxygen (paO2) in the steady-statebreathing air remains/H110217. Gentle diuresis might help the oedema although oxygenwould be a better approach if he is sufficiently hypoxic. Annual influenza vaccinationshould be recommended and Streptococcus pneumoniaevaccination should be given.Antibiotics might be kept at home for infective exacerbations.Exercise tolerance will be reduced by his obesity and by lack of muscle use. A weight-reducing diet should be started. If he has the motivation to continue exercising, then apulmonary rehabilitation programme has been shown to increase exercise tolerance byaround 20 per cent and to improve quality of life. Other more dramatic interventions suchas lung-reduction surgery or transplantation might be considered in a younger patient.Depression is often associated with the poor exercise tolerance and social isolation, andthis should be considered.COPD is often regarded as a condition where treatment has little to offer. However, a vig-orous approach tailored to the need of the individual patient can provide a worthwhilebenefit.
228In COPD /H92522-agonists and anticholinergic agents produce similar effects or a greaterresponse from anticholinergics. The combination may be helpful. In contrast, in asthma/H92522-agonists produce a greater effect.Assessment for home oxygen should be made in a stable state on optimal inhaled therapy.Exercise and diet are important elements in the management of COPD.Depression is common in chronic conditions such as COPD
-----
A 65-year-old man presents with an ulcer on the dorsum of his right foot. He noticed asore area on the right foot 3 weeks ago and this has extended to an ulcerated lesion whichis not painful. He has complained of pain in the legs for some months. This pain comes onwhen he walks and settles down when he stops.He had an inguinal hernia repaired 2 years ago and he stopped smoking then on theadvice of the anaesthetist. Previously he smoked 20 cigarettes per day. He drinks fourpints of beer at weekends. His father died of a myocardial infarction aged 58 years.

His blood pressure is 136/84 mmHg. The respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal systemsare normal. There is a 3 cm ulcerated area with a well-demarcated edge on the dorsum ofthe right foot. The posterior tibial pulses are palpable on both feet, and the dorsalis pedison the left. The capillary return time is 4 s. On neurological examination there is some lossof light touch sensation in the toes. Varicose veins are present in the long saphenous dis-tribution on both legs.
229
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLWhite cell count 7.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 4.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 2.8/H11003109/LPlatelets 372/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 140 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 89/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LGlucose 6 

 91The presence of varicose veins raises the possibility of a venous ulcer related to poorvenous return. However, venous ulcers are usually found around the medial malleolus andare often associated with skin changes of chronic venous insufficiency. This has the fea-tures of an ulcer caused by arterial rather than venous ulceration or a mixed aetiology.Arterial ulcers are often on the dorsum of the foot. Arterial ulcers tend to be deeper andmore punched out in appearance. The left dorsalis pedis pulse is not palpable and the capil-lary return time is greater than the normal value of 2 s. The story of pain in the legs onwalking requires a little more detail but it is suggestive of intermittent claudication relatedto insufficient blood supply to the exercising calf muscles.The raised HbA1csuggests diabetes and prolonged hyperglycaemia. In diabetes the arterialinvolvement may be in small vessels with greater preservation of the pulses. The periph-eral sensory neuropathy may also be associated with diabetes and lead to unrecognizedtrauma to the skin which then heals poorly. Other risk factors for arterial disease are thefamily history and the history of smoking.Further investigations would include measurement of the ankle:brachial blood pressureratio. If this is less than 0.97 it suggests arterial disease, and a low index would be a con-traindication to pressure treatment in trying to heal the ulcer.Ultrasonic angiology would help to identify the anatomy of the arterial circulation in thelower limbs and would show if there are correctable narrowings of major vessels. Goodcontrol of diabetes can slow progression of complications such as neuropathy andmicrovascular disease. Care of the feet is a very important part of the treatment of dia-betes and should be a regular element of follow-up.
230The position and nature of ulcers provide clues to their cause.Diabetic feet are particularly vulnerable because of sensory loss, arterial insufficiencyand high sugars. Foot care is an important element of regular diabetic management
-----
A 50-year-old man has a health screen as part of an application for life insurance. He hasno symptoms. He smokes 15 cigarettes per day and drinks 10 units of alcohol per week. Inhis family history his father died of a myocardial infarction aged 56 years.

He weighs 84 kg and is 1.6 m (5 ft 8 in) tall. His blood pressure is 164/98 mmHg.

 is otherwise normal.
231
NormalHaemoglobin 15.7 g/dLWhite cell count 10.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 287/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 139 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 88/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCholesterol 5.0 mmol/L/H110215.5 mmol/LTriglyceride 1.90 mmol/LVery low-density lipoprotin (VLDL) 0.65 mmol/LLow-density lipoprotein (LDL) 3.4 mmol/LHigh-density lipoprotein (HDL) 1.1Electrocardiogram 

 92The ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy (R-wave in V5 and S-wave in V1 /H1102235 mm).Although only a single reading is given, the hypertrophy makes it likely that the bloodpressure represents sustained hypertension rather than a ‘white coat’ effect. It should berepeated several times over the next few weeks for confirmation, but treatment is likely tobe indicated.The risks of vascular disease are related to the presence of other risk factors. The bodymass index is 28 showing that he is overweight. He is a smoker with a positive family his-tory of cardiovascular disease. Tables such as the Sheffield table can be used to obtain acalculation of the risks of cardiovascular disease.The other question is whether a search for the cause of the hypertension is indicated.Around 85 per cent of cases are idiopathic. Most of the secondary cases are related to renaldisease, and the renal function is normal here. A number of endocrine causes (Cushing’ssyndrome, Conn’s syndrome) are associated with hypokalaemia. If the blood pressure is dif-ficult to control, secondary causes such as renal artery stenosis should be considered andinvestigated by renal ultrasound or a technique to visualize the renal arteries such as mag-netic resonance angiography or digital subtraction angiography.The cholesterol is at a level which would warrant treatment if there was evidence of vascu-lar disease. The hypertension itself should be controlled according to current guidelineswhich would recommend starting with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor ina patient younger than 55 years.
232A single elevated blood pressure needs to be remeasured over several weeks.All relevant risk factors should be considered in assessing cardiovascular risk and plan-ning treatment.Most cases of hypertension do not have an identifiable underlying cause This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 79-year-old man is brought to his general practitioner by his daughter who says that heis getting very tired and has lost interest in life. She says that a general malaise has beenpresent for 5–6 weeks. She thinks that he might have lost a few kilograms in weight overthis time, but he does not weigh himself regularly. He says that he has felt limited on exer-tion by tiredness for a year or so, and on a few occasions when he tried to do more he hada feeling of tightness across his chest. There is no other medical history of note. He smokes20 cigarettes a day and drinks a pint or two of Guinness each Saturday and Sunday. He isnot on any medication, just taking occasional paracetamol. On systems review, he saysthat he has lost his appetite over the last month. His sleep has been disturbed by occa-sional nocturia, and on two or three occasions in the last few weeks he has been disturbedby sweating at night.There is no relevant family history. He is a retired shopkeeper who normally keeps rea-sonably fit walking his dog.

His pulse is 70/min, blood pressure 110/66 mmHg. There is no clubbing, but tar staining ispresent on the fingers and nails of the right hand. The jugular venous pressure is notraised. The apex beat is displaced 2 cm from the midclavicular line. On auscultation of theheart there is a grade 3/6 ejection systolic murmur radiating to the carotids and a softearly diastolic murmur audible at the lower left sternal edge. There are no abnormalitiesto find in the abdomen or nervous system. The urine looked clear but routine stick test-ing showed a trace of blood and on urine microscopy there were some red cells. A chestX-ray was reported as showing a slightly large heart.
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 88 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 12.6/H11003109/LNeutrophils 10.7/H11003109/LLymphocytes 1 Electrocardiogram 

 93This 79-year-old man has the clinical features of aortic stenosis and regurgitation. Themurmurs are of mixed aortic valve disease and the ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy(sum of negative deflection in V1 and positive deflection in V5 or V2 and V6 greater than35 mm), suggesting that there has been significant pressure overload from aortic stenosis.The findings of mixed aortic valve disease, microscopic haematuria, malaise and fever(probable with the night sweats) make infective endocarditisa likely diagnosis. This wouldfit with the haematological picture showing a normocytic anaemia, a raised neutrophilcount and a high ESR. In the elderly, infective endocarditis may be an insidious illness andshould be considered in any patient who has murmurs and fever or any other change in thecardiac signs or symptoms. The other classical findings of splenomegaly, splinter haemor-rhages, clubbing, Osler’s nodes, Janeway lesions and Roth’s spots are often absent.Precipitating events such as dental treatment or other sources of bacteraemia may not beevident in the history.It is difficult to tie all the features into any other single diagnosis. The signs are of aorticvalve disease. When there is a fever or other evidence of infection in the presence of valvedisease, infective endocarditis must always be considered although in practice other unre-lated infections are more common. Other infections such as tuberculosis or abscess arepossible or an underlying lymphoma or other malignancy.The most important investigations would be:blood cultures performed before any antibiotics are given. In this case three blood cul-tures grew Streptococcus viridansechocardiogram which showed a thickened bicuspid aortic valve, a common congeni-tal abnormality predisposing to significant functional valve disturbance in middle andold age. Vegetations can be detected on a transthoracic echocardiogram if they areprominent, but transoesophageal echocardiogram is more sensitive in detecting vege-tations on the valves.Treatment with intravenous benzylpenicillin and gentamicin for 2 weeks, followed by oralamoxicillin resulted in resolution of the fever with no haemodynamic deterioration orchange in the murmurs of mixed aortic valve disease. A microbiologist should be con-sulted about appropriate antibiotics and duration.After treatment of the endocarditis, the symptoms of pain and tiredness on exertion wouldneed to be considered to see if valve surgery was indicated. Prior to this it would be rou-tine to look at the coronary arteries by angiography to see if simultaneous coronary arterysurgery was needed.Symptoms on exertion in aortic valve disease are a sign that valve surgery needs to beconsidered.In infective endocarditis, it is unusual to have many of the classical physical signs. In theelderly, it may present with non-specific malaise
-----
A 70-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with acute onset of abdominal pain. Theabdominal pain started quite suddenly 24 h before admission and has continued since then.It is a constant central abdominal pain. She has vomited altered food on one occasion.She has a history of occasional angina on exertion for 5 years. She has a glyceryl trinitratespray but she has not needed this in the last 3 months. A year ago she was found to be inatrial fibrillation at 120/min, and she was started on digoxin, which she still takes. The onlyother medical history of note is that she had a hysterectomy for menorrhagia 30 years agoand she has hypertension controlled on a small dose of a thiazide diuretic for the last 3 years. She does not take any other medication apart from low-dose aspirin. She does notsmoke and does not drink alcohol. She retired from work as a cleaner 8 years ago.

She was in atrial fibrillation at a rate of 92/min with a blood pressure of 114/76 mmHg.Respiratory examination was normal. She was tender with some guarding in the centre ofthe abdomen. No masses were palpable in the abdomen and there were just occasional bowelsounds to hear on auscultation. Over the next 2 h the blood pressure fell to 84/60 mmHg. Shewas admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and monitored while initial investigations wereperformed. The abdominal X-ray showed no gas under the diaphragm and no dilated loopsof bowel or fluid levels. While under observation, the urine output fell off. Re-examinationshowed that bowel sounds were absent. Her hands and feet remained warm. Measurementsof cardiac output in ICU showed that it remained high.1Chart from intensive care unit 

 94One diagnosis of the abdominal pain which would explain her condition and fit with herpredisposing situation is ischaemic bowelcaused by an embolus from the heart. The patientis likely to become very ill without markedly abnormal physical signs. Atrial fibrillationincreases the likelihood of such an event. She has been on aspirin which will reduce slightlythe risk of embolic events, but not on anticoagulants which would have decreased the riskfurther. In the presence of pre-existing cardiovascular problems, shown by the hypertensionand angina, anticoagulation would normally be started if there are no contraindications. Therisk of cerebrovascular accidents caused by emboli from the heart has been shown to bereduced. In lone atrial fibrillation with no underlying cardiac disease the risks of emboli andthe benefits of anticoagulation are less. There are alternative diagnoses such as perforationor pancreatitis, and it is not possible to be sure of the cause of the abdominal problem fromthe information given here. After the first hour or two the cen-tral venous pressure drops, the blood pressure falls and the pulse rate rises in associationwith the fall in urine output.These findings show that she is developing shock with inadequate perfusion of vital organs.
238Types of shock ExampleHypovolaemic shock Blood lossCardiogenic shock Myocardial infarctionExtracardiac obstructive shock Pulmonary embolismVasodilatory (distributive) shock SepsisPossible causes for shock!All these causes are possible in this woman with abdominal problems and a history ofischaemic heart disease. The fact that the cardiac output is high makes blood loss and cardiogenic shock unlikely. The most likely cause is septic shock where peripheral vasodi-latation would lead to a high cardiac output but a falling blood pressure and rising pulserate. Vasoconstriction and reduced blood flow occurs in certain organs, such as the kid-neys, leading to the term ‘distributive shock’ with maintained overall cardiac output butinappropriate distribution of blood flow. The rise in central temperature and the lack of amarked fall in peripheral temperature would fit with this cause of the shock.The patient was stabilized with fluid replacement and antibiotics before going to theatrewhere the diagnosis of ischaemic bowel from an embolus was confirmed. Arteriographycan confirm the diagnosis but confirmation is often at laparotomy which is usuallyrequired to remove the necrotic bowel.Aspirin and anticoagulation should be considered in patients with atrial fibrillation.Septic shock may be present with warm peripheries through vasodilatation.A drop in the central venous pressure may be the first sign of developing shock
-----
A 66-year-old woman notices that she is having trouble performing some everyday taskssuch as doing up buttons on her blouse and chopping up vegetables in her cooking. Shecomplains that her muscles feel stiff, and it is taking her longer than it did to walk to thelocal shops. She is anxious about these problems since she lives alone and has to do every-thing for herself. She has noticed a little shakiness which she ascribes to anxiety. Herdaughter has told her that it is becoming increasingly difficult to read the small writing inthe letters she sends. She is a retired journalist and has no significant past medical history.There is no disturbance of her bowels or micturition. Her appetite has been good and herweight steady. She complains that she has been sleeping poorly and is, consequently, rathertired. She does not smoke tobacco and drinks only occasionally. She has hypertension andtakes atenolol 50 mg daily.

Her pulse is 60/min and regular, blood pressure is 134/84 mmHg. There are no abnormalitiesin the cardiovascular or respiratory systems. On neurological examination there is no musclewasting. She has generally increased muscle tone throughout the range of movement andequal in flexors and extensors. There is a slight tremor affecting mainly her right hand,which is suppressed when she tries to do something. She has problems with fine tasks suchas doing up buttons. Power, reflexes, co-ordination and sensation are all normal. When askedto walk she is a little slow to get started and has difficulty stopping and turning 

 95There is evidence in the history and examination of tremor, rigidity and bradykinesia. Herwriting shows micrographia secondary to the rigidity and slowness of movement. Her hyper-tension is well controlled on the beta-blocker. Beta-blockers can cause tiredness and slownessbut not to the extent seen in this woman. This woman has Parkinson’s diseasepresenting withthe classic triad of tremor, rigidity and hypokinesia. Tremor is usually an early symptom andmay be unilateral. The combination of tremor with rigidity leads to the cogwheel form of rigid-ity. The patient often goes on to have a blank mask-like facies. There is difficulty starting towalk (freezing) and the patient uses small steps and has difficulty stopping (festination). Thereis generally normal intellectual function, but there is often depression. Sleep is often disturbedcontributing to daytime tiredness. The characteristic pathological abnormality is degenerationof dopamine-secreting neurones in the nigrostriatal pathway of the basal ganglia.Parkinsonian features (parkinsonism) may occur in a variety of diseases:Parkinson’s diseasepostencephalitic parkinsonismneuroleptic drug-induced Parkinson’s diseaseparkinsonism in association with Alzheimer’s/multi-infarct dementia.
240Rest tremor: the tremor is worse at rest and is typical of parkinsonism.Postural tremor: this is characteristic of benign essential tremor, physiologicaltremor and exaggerated physiological tremor caused by anxiety, alcohol andthyrotoxicosis. Benign essential tremor is not present at rest, but appears onholding the arms outstretched but is not worse on movement (finger–nose testing).Tests of co-ordination are normal and walking is unaffected. There is usually afamily history of tremor and the tremor is helped by alcohol and beta-blockers.Intention tremor: the tremor is worse on movement and is most obvious infinger–nose testing. It is usually caused by brainstem or cerebellar disease caused bysuch diseases as multiple sclerosis, localized tumours or spinocerebellar degeneration.Classification of tremor!
A variety of drugs are available to treat this woman’s Parkinson’s disease. Selegiline, aninhibitor of monoamine oxidase B may delay the need to start levodopa and may slow therate of progression of the disease, but has significant side-effects. Levodopa is usually usedin combination with a selective dopa decarboxylase inhibitor which does not cross theblood–brain barrier and reduces peripheral adverse effects. The commonest side-effectsare nausea, vomiting, dizziness, postural hypotension and neuropsychiatric problems. Aftermany years of treatment the effects tend to diminish and the patient may develop rapidoscillations in control – the ‘on–off’ effect. When these develop, a sustained release for-mulation of levodopa or a dopamine agonist, e. bromocriptine, may produce improve-ment. Because of the loss of effect with time, treatment should not be started too early.This requires careful discussion with the individual patient. She should be assessed by aphysiotherapist and occupational therapist and provided with advice and aids. With timeher house may need to be altered to aid her mobility.Parkinson’s disease is characterized by tremor, rigidity and hypokinesia.Patient management is long term and multidisciplinary.Benefits of levodopa treatment in Parkinson’s disease may lessen with time This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 35-year-old woman presents with a 6-month history of increasing shortness of breath.This has progressed so that she is now short of breath on walking up one flight of stairs andwalks more slowly on the flat than other people her age. In addition she has developed adry cough over the last 3 months.In her previous medical history she had mild asthma as a child. She thinks that her fatherdied of a chest problem in his 40s. She takes occasional paracetamol and has taken ‘slim-ming pills’ in the past.She is a lifetime non-smoker and drinks less than 10 units of alcohol per week. She hasworked in the printing trade since she left school. She has two children aged 8 and 10 yearsand they have a cat and a rabbit at home.

There is no clubbing, anaemia or cyanosis. 

 of the cardiovascular system isnormal. In the respiratory system expansion of the lungs seems to be reduced but sym-metrical. The percussion note is normal as is tactile vocal fremitus. On auscultation thereare fine late inspiratory crackles at both lung bases.
Respiratory function tests revealed the following:Actual PredictedFEV1(L) 3.3FER (FEV1/FVC) (%) 83 75–80PEF (L/min) 470 450–550FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; FER, forced expiratoryratio; PEF, peak expiratory flow High-resolution computedtomography scan 

 96The history shows a progressive condition over at least 6 months. It is often difficult to besure of the exact length of history when a symptom such as breathlessness has an insidi-ous onset. A few possibilities are raised by the details of the history. There is a history ofasthma but the absence of wheezing or obstruction on the respiratory function tests rulethat out. An occupational history is always important in lung disease but probably nothere. Occupational asthma can be associated with the printing trade but not a restrictiveproblem as shown here. The findings on examination fit with a restrictive problem withlimited expansion and the crackles caused by re-opening of airways closing during expir-ation because of stiff lungs and low lung volumes.The respiratory function tests show a mild restrictive ventilatory defect with reduced FEV1and FVC but a slightly high ratio, suggesting stiff lungs or chest wall. Further tests suchas transfer factor would be expected to be reduced in the presence of pulmonary fibrosis.The chest X-ray shows small lung fields and nodular and reticular shadowing most marked inmid and lower zones. The high-resolution CT scan shows widespread fibrotic change with sub-pleural cyst formation. These changes are compatible with diffuse pulmonary fibrosis (fibro-sing alveolitis). In talking about fibrosis of the lungs it is important to differentiate diffuse finepulmonary fibrosis, as in this case, and localized pulmonary fibrosis as a result of scarringafter an acute inflammatory condition such as pneumonia. The distribution and the pattern ofthe changes on the CT scan are important in determining the diagnosis and the likelihood ofresponse to treatment in pulmonary fibrosis. Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis can be associated withconditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and can be induced by inhaled dusts or ingested drugs.None of these seem likely here making this likely to be idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis(IPF).There is a rare familial form so the father’s illness might be relevant. The common type of IPFis usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) with a subpleural distribution on the CT scan as shownhere. In association with connective tissue disease there may be a more widespread patchy pat-tern of non-specific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP). The appearance of ‘ground glass’ shadow-ing on the high-resolution CT is associated with an active cellular alveolitis and the greaterlikelihood of response to treatment. NSIP also has a better response rate than UIP.Further investigations consist of a search for a cause or associated conditions and a deci-sion whether a lung biopsy is warranted. Bronchoscopic biopsies are too small to be rep-resentative or useful in this situation, and a video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy would bethe usual procedure. It would usually be appropriate to obtain histology of the lung insomeone of this age.Treatment consists of low- to moderate-dose corticosteroids with or without an immunosup-pressant such as azathioprine continued for several months to look for an effect, but theresults are poor in UIP and it is important not to cause more harm than benefit from treatmentwith prolonged steroids and immunosuppressants. There is some evidence that anti-oxidantssuch as acetylcysteine improve the outlook and these may be combined with the steroids andazathioprine. In a patient of this age, lung transplantation might be a consideration as the dis-ease progresses. Progression rates are variable and an acute aggressive form with death in 6 months can occur. More common in UIP is steady progression over a few years.
244Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis has a range of causes relevant to management.Ineffective treatment may produce serious side-effects without significant benefit
-----
Four months ago a 47-year-old publican was admitted to hospital with acute chest pain.A subendocardial inferior myocardial infarction was diagnosed and he was treated withthrombolytics and aspirin. After discharge he complained of angina, and coronaryangiography was performed. This showed severe triple-vessel disease not suitable forstenting, and coronary artery bypass grafting was performed. He is attending a cardiacrehabilitation clinic and he has had no further angina since his surgery. He has a strongfamily history of ischaemic heart disease, with his father and two paternal uncles havingdied of myocardial infarctions in their 50 s; his 50-year-old brother has angina. He is mar-ried with two children. He smokes 25 cigarettes per day and drinks at least 40 units ofalcohol per week. He is taking atenolol and aspirin.

He is slightly overweight (85 kg; body mass index/H1100528). He has tar-stained nails. He hasbilateral corneal arcus, xanthelasmata around his eyes and xanthomata on his Achillestendons. He has a well-healed midline sternotomy scar. His pulse is 64/min regular, bloodpressure 150/84 mmHg. He has no palpable pedal pulses. His respiratory, gastrointestinaland neurological systems are normal.
245
NormalHaemoglobin 16.7 g/dLWhite cell count 10.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 336/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 135 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 82/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 16 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlanine transaminase 33 IU/L 5–35 IU/LAlkaline phosphatase 72 IU/L 30–300 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 68 IU/L 11–51 IU/LCholesterol 12.2 mmol/L/H110215.5 mmol/LTriglyceride 2.90 mmol/LVery low-desnity lipoprotein (VLDL) 0.65 mmol/LLow-density lipoprotein (LDL) 8.4 mmol/LHigh-density lipoprotein (HDL) 0 

 97The obvious abnormal investigation is a very high serum cholesterol with high LDL andlow HDL levels. He has many clinical features to go with the high cholesterol and prema-ture vascular disease. This man has familial hypercholesterolaemia. He has presentedwith premature coronary artery disease. His absent pedal pulses suggest peripheral vasculardisease. Familial hypercholesterolaemia is an autosomal dominant condition. The homo-zygous condition is rare and affected individuals usually die before the age of 20 years dueto premature atherosclerosis. The heterozygous form affects about 1 in 400 individuals inthe UK, and 50 per cent of males will develop ischaemic heart disease before the age of 50years. Corneal arcus, xanthelasmata and xanthomata on Achilles tendons and the exten-sor tendons on the dorsum of the hands develop in early adult life. The metabolic defectis a result of a reduced number of high-affinity cell-surface LDL receptors. This leads toincreased LDL levels. Increased uptake of LDL by macrophage scavenger receptors leads toincreased oxidized LDL, which is particularly atherogenic. Triglyceride and VLDL levelsare normal or mildly elevated. HDL levels are low. The other major causes of hypercho-lesterolaemia are familial combined hyperlipidaemia and polygenic hypercholesterol-aemia. Familial combined hyperlipidaemia differs from familial hypercholesterolaemia bypatients having raised triglycerides. Patients with polygenic hypercholesterolaemia have asimilar lipid profile to familial hypercholesterolaemia but they do not develop xanthomata.Hypercholesterolaemia may commonly occur in hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, nephroticsyndrome and hepatic cholestasis.This patient is at extremely high risk for further vascular events and especially occlusionof his coronary artery bypass grafts. His risk depends on the combination of his risk fac-tors, and all of these need attention. He should be advised to stop smoking, reduce hisalcohol intake (which is also affecting his liver as judged from the raised gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase), take more exercise and eat a strict low-cholesterol diet. Diet alone will notcontrol this level of cholesterol. He should have pharmacological treatment with a statinbut may need combined treatment for this level of hyperlipidaemia. His children shouldhave their lipid profile measured so that they can be treated to prevent premature cor-onary artery disease. There is clear evidence from clinical trials that primary preventionof coronary artery disease can be achieved by lowering serum cholesterol. The West ofScotland Coronary Prevention Study (WOSCOPS) showed cholesterol lowering withpravastatin reduced both the number of coronary events and coronary mortality in middle-aged men with a serum LDL level of greater than 4 mmol/L. In patients who have evidenceof cardiovascular disease secondary prevention is even more important, aiming for a cho-lesterol level as low as possible. Statins are well tolerated although myositis is a rare butserious complication.
246The commonest causes for hypercholesterolaemia are polygenic hypercholesterolaemia,familial hypercholesterolaemia and familial combined hyperlipidaemia.Effective drugs are now available to treat hypercholesterolaemia and should be usedaggressively to reduce coronary artery disease.In secondary prevention the aim is the lowest possible cholesterol level
-----
A 66-year-old man has been persuaded by his wife to go to his general practitioner (GP).She is worried that he has changed. Over the last 4 weeks he has become lethargic andrather vague. He has a 12-year history of chronic cough and sputum production, but shethinks that these symptoms may have increased a little over the last 8 weeks. He hassmoked 20 cigarettes daily for the last 50 years and he drinks around 14 units of alcoholper week. Two years ago he became depressed and was treated with an antidepressant for6 months with good effect. She cannot remember the name of the medication. He hadworked all his life as a postman until retirement 6 years ago.

He is a little vague in his answers to questions. There are no abnormalities to find in thecardiovascular, respiratory or abdominal systems. There is no lymphadenopathy. On neuro-logicalexamination he seems to have mild generalized muscle weakness. Reflexes, toneand sensation are all normal. His peak flow and spirometry are within normal limits.
247
NormalHaemoglobin 14.0 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 86 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 6.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 297/H11003109/L 150–400/H11003109/LSodium 119 mmol/L 135–150 mmol/LPotassium 3 

 98The blood results show hyponatraemia and the chest X-ray shows a mass overlying theright hilum. This degree of hyponatraemia might be expected to cause some cerebralchanges. A lower level might be associated with fits. Above 120–125 mmol/L the effectsare likely to be non-specific tiredness.Possible causes for the hyponatraemia in this man are:inappropriate argenine vasopressin (AVP, antidiuretic hormone) secretion found inassociation with the respiratory disorders of undifferentiated small-cell carcinoma ofthe lung or, occasionally, with pneumonia or tuberculosisAddison’s disease (adrenocortical failure) which would be expected to produce a highpotassium level and postural hypotension. Addison’s disease might be linked with respiratory problems through adrenal involvement by metastases or tuberculosis.Other causes such as diuretic treatment, inappropriate AVP from drug therapy (e. carba-mazepine, phenothiazines, amitriptyline), cerebrovascular events, salt-losing nephropathiesor overhydration from intravenous fluids or overdrinking are not likely from the story givenhere. He has been treated with antidepressants, but not for the last 18 months. In view of thechest X-ray the most likely diagnosis is inappropriate AVP secretion with a small-cellundifferentiated carcinoma of the lung. This can be confirmed by measurement of serumand urine osmolarities to show serum dilution while the urine is concentrated. Levels of AVPcan be measured.In this case, the osmolarities confirmed the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hor-mone (SIADH) secretion; bronchial biopsies at fibreoptic bronchoscopy showed a small-cellundifferentiated carcinoma. Extension to the carina and computed tomography (CT)appearances showed it to be not resectable. Fluid restriction to 750 mL daily produced anincrease in serum sodium to 128 mmol/L with improvement in the confusion and weakness.If this fails to produce adequate results demeclocycline can be used. This derivative oftetracycline antibiotics interferes with the action of ADH in the renal tubules.Chemotherapy was started for the lung tumour. Such treatment often produces a responsein terms of shrinkage of the tumour, improved quality of life and increased survival. Itmay also help the ectopic hormone secretion. Unfortunately, cure is still infrequent.Small-cell undifferentiated carcinomas of the lung are fast-growing tumours, usuallyunresectable at presentation.
248Change of character may have a metabolic explanation.The commonest cause of hyponatraemia is diuretic therapy.Measurement of serum and urine osmolarities can help to determine the cause ofhyponatraemia This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 50-year-old woman has complained of shortness of breath for 3 months. It has steadilybecome more severe and is associated with an occasional cough. Otherwise she has beenwell. She smokes 15 cigarettes per day and drinks about 14 units of alcohol each week.Her 20-year-old son has asthma and she has tried his salbutamol inhaler on two or threeoccasions but found it to be of no real benefit. She has tested herself on her son’s peakflow meter at home and she has obtained values of about 100 L/min. On direct question-ing she says that the shortness of breath tends to be worse on lying down but there are noother particular precipitating factors or variations through the day. She works as an officecleaner and has no significant previous medical history.

Her respiratory rate is 18 per minute. Pulse rate is 72/min and blood pressure 138/84 mmHg.The heart sounds are normal. There is a generalized wheeze heard all over the chest but noother abnormalities. Results are as follows:Actual Post-bronchodilator PredictedFEV1(L) 1.4FER (FEV1/FVC) (%) 29 29 72–80PEF (L/min) 80 80 440–540Residual volume (L) 1.8Total lung capacity (L) 5.0FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; FER, forced expiratoryratio; PEF, peak expiratory flow Flow–volume loop 

 99The flow–volume curve shows the same low flow throughout the whole volume of the vitalcapacity. This situation is typical of a rigid large-airway obstruction. It is not reversiblewith bronchodilator therapy. The spirometry trace of volume against time in such casesshows a straight line of the same reduced flow right up to the vital capacity. These findingsare typical of a narrowing in a larger airway. On examination, this airway narrowing is likely to produce a single monophonic wheeze which may be heard over a wide area ofthe chest.3Flow–volume loop: intrathoracicnarrowing.4Flow–volume loop: extrathoracicnarrowing.!The situation may easily be confused with asthma if the peak flow and the wheezingare accepted uncritically. In asthma, the spirometry will show a reduced FEV1but theflow rate (and therefore the slope of the line relating volume and time) will vary. Thewheezing in asthma comes from many narrowed airways of different calibre andmass, and the wheezes are often described as polyphonic.Differential diagnosis of rigid large-airway obstruction
The fixed flow in inspiration and expiration in this case suggest a rigid large-airway nar-rowing. If it is outside the thoracic cage,as in a laryngeal lesion, it will be more evident on inspiration. If the site is intrathoracic,the flow limitation will be greater in expiration. Large-airway narrowing can be causedby inflammatory conditions such as tuberculosis or Wegener’s granulomatosis, damagefrom prolonged endotracheal intubation or by extrinsic pressure such as a retrosternalgoitre. However, the commonest cause is a carcinoma of a large airway Some further investigation of the large airways is required. The great majority of symp-tomatic lung tumours are visible on plain chest X-ray but central lesions in large airwaysmay not be seen. Further investigation could be a bronchoscopy or a computed tomog-raphy (CT) scan. A bronchoscopy to see and biopsy any lesion would be best. In this case,fibre-optic bronchoscopy showed a carcinoma in the lower trachea reducing the lumen toa small orifice. Treatment was by radiotherapy with oral steroids to cover any initialswelling of the tumour which might increase the degree of obstruction in the trachea.
253Large-airway narrowing produces characteristic findings on visual displays of respiratoryfunction but is more difficult to identify from the numbers alone.A small proportion of central lung tumours may present with local symptoms but a nor-mal chest X-ray
-----
A 22-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with a painful left leg. She uses intravenousdrugs and injects into veins in the arms and the groins. The left leg has become swollenand painful over the last week. She has had two previous admissions to hospital withinthe last 6 months, once for an overdose of heroin and once for an infection in the left arm.She smokes 20 cigarettes daily and drinks up to 40 units of alcohol per week.

Her pulse is 84/min and regular. Her blood pressure is 124/74 mmHg. Her temperature is37. The heart sounds are normal and there are no abnormal findings on examinationof the respiratory system. She has a swollen left calf with some local tenderness. There arepuncture sites in both groins but no obvious sepsis.
254
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLWhite cell count 10.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 154/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 74/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LUltrasound of left leg: venous thrombus extending into the left femoral vein
Venous access is difficult but a line is inserted in the right arm and she is treated with sub-cutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin, intravenous vitamins and benzodiazepines, anda methadone-replacement regime. On the fourth day of her admission she became muchmore unwell.Further examinationHer pulse is 112 per minute and regular. Her blood pressure is 88/50 mmHg although sheseems warm and well perused. The respiratory rate is18/min, jugular venous pressure isnot raised, there are no new heart murmurs and oxygen saturation is 97 per cent on roomair. Her temperature is 37  g/dLWhite cell count 18.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 197/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 131 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 79/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LC-reactive protein (CRP) 210 mg/L/H1102110 mg/L 

 100The initial diagnosis was a deep vein thrombosis. This complication is not unusual inintravenous drug users and can be associated with sepsis although there was no sign ofthis on the initial investigations. She has been treated for the thrombosis and for alcoholwithdrawal and her opiate use.There are a number of possibilities for her acute deterioration. The deep vein thrombosiswould have predisposed her to a pulmonary embolus, but the normal respiratory rate, lackof elevation of jugular venous pressure and normal oxygen saturation make this unlikely.As an intravenous drug user she might have taken more drugs even under supervision inhospital.The tachycardia and lowered blood pressure raise the possibility of haemorrhage whichmight be precipitated by the anticoagulants. However, the raised CRP, white cell count andabnormal electrolytes in a warm, well-perfused patient suggest sepsisas the likely cause.In an intravenous drug user one would think of infective endocarditis which may occur onthe valves of the right side of the heart and be more difficult to diagnose. Lung abscessesfrom septic emboli are another possibility in an intravenous drug user with a deep veinthrombosis, and a chest X-ray should be taken although the lack of respiratory symptomsmakes this less likely. In this case the intravenous line has been left in place longer thanusual because of the difficulties of intravenous access and it has become infected. Linesshould be inspected every day, changed regularly and removed as soon as possible. Theprevious hospital admissions raise then possibility of infections such as methicillin-reistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA). In this case MRSA was found in blood cultures and treatedwith intravenous vancomycin with good effect.On recovery and discharge there were problems with the question of anticoagulation.Warfarin treatment raised difficulties because of the unreliability of dosing, attendance atanticoagulant clinics and blood sampling. It was decided to continue treatment as an out-patient with subcutaneous heparin for 6 weeks.
256Patients using intravenous drugs often pose problems in venous access, and sampling fortests such as international normalized ratio (INR).Indwelling venous lines should be changed regularly and removed as soon as possible abdominal pain/discomfort 5(14–16),32(89–90), 36(98–9), 41(109–10),43(113–14), 69(179–80), 72(185–6),77(195–6), 81(205–6), 94(237–8)abdominal sepsis, postoperative 42(112)achalasia of the cardia 55(145–6)Addison’s disease and Addisonian crisis seeadrenocortical failureadenoma, pituitary 11(28)ADHseearginine vasopressinadrenocortical failure (Addison’s disease)98(248)acute, steroid-induced 71(183–4)AIDSseeHIV infectionairway obstructionchronic 90(226–8)large, rigid, differential diagnosis 99(252)alcoholic liver disease 7(19–20)aldosterone deficiency 71(183–4)amenorrhoea 30(83–4)aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity 42amnesia 62(163–4)amyloidosis 22(59–61)anaemiairon-deficiency 81(206)macrocytic, causes/differential diagnosis18(46), 54(144)microcytic 81(206)in sickle cell disease 40(108)ankle swelling 22(59–61)anorexia and fever 8(21–2)anorexia nervosa 30(83–4)antidiuretic hormone seearginine vasopressinaortic valve disease 93(236)appendicitis, acute 41(109–10)arginine vasopressin (ADH; antidiuretichormone; vasopressin)inadequate secretion 154inappropriate secretion 79(200), 98(248)arterial ulcer, foot 91(229–30)arteritis, giant cell 82(207–8)arthritisdifferential diagnosis of monoarthritis15(38)reactive 15(38–9)rheumatoid 27(75–7)septicseeseptic arthritisascorbic acid (vitamin C) deficiency52(137–8)asthma 4(11–12)atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis 37(100)autoimmune thyroid disease 88(222)autonomic neuropathy, diabetic 87(220)back pain 10(25–6), 31(86–8), 67(174–5)bacterial meningitis 76(193–4)biliary disorders 5(14–16), 69(179–80),77(195–6), 88(221–2)blackout seeconsciousness, lossbleeding oesophageal varices 7(20)blisters 39(105–6)blood, urine seehaematuriablood pressure seehypertension; hypotensionbone disease, metabolic 31(86–8)bowel disorders 6(17–18), 32(89–90),36(99–100), 38(103–4), 41(109–10),43(114), 63(165–6), 94(237–8)breast cancer metastases seemetastasesbreathlessness (dyspnoea) 4(11), 96(241–3),99(250–3)chest pain and 40(107–8), 50(130–3),78(187–8)cough and 90(226–8)on exertion 24(65–6)fever and 25(68–70)tiredness and headaches and 18(45–6)bronchiectasis 3(10)bruising, easy 17(43–4)bullae (blisters) 39(105–6)calcium disturbances 12(32)calculiseestonescancerseemalignant tumours; metastasescarbon monoxide poisoning 75(191–2)carcinoid tumor 43(113–14)carcinomabreast, metastases seemetastasescolon 6(17–18)lung 98(248), 99(252, 253)pancreas 69(179–80)skin 68(177–8)cardia, gastric (upper part of stomach)achalasia 55(145–6)tear (/H11005Mallory—Weiss lesion) 84(211–12)INDEXReferences are by case number with relevant page number(s) following in brackets. References witha page range e. 25(68–70) indicate that although the subject may be mentioned only on one page,it concerns the whole case
-----
